INTRODUCTION
The Göllü Dağ complex is located in Cappadocia,
in Central Anatolia. This volcanic massif, about
12 km wide with a maximum elevation of 2143 m,
was first occupied in the Lower Paleolithic. The
earliest archaeological levels of Kaletepe Deresi 3
have yielded the remains of an Acheulean occupation,
the only one excavated in Anatolia so far (Slimak et
al. 2008). Several find spots with Lower Paleolithic
assemblages were identified during the Göllü Dağ
survey (Balkan-Atlı et al. 2008-2009, this paper).
Early cultural remains found both at Dursunlu in
the Konya plain (Güleç et al. 2009) and in the Göllü
Dağ area suggest that these landscapes can help us
to further understand the place of Anatolia in early
hominin dispersals (Kuhn in press).
The Central Anatolian Volcanic Province, and
more specifically the two volcanoes of Göllü Dağ
and Nenezi Dağ, are even more important for later
pre- and proto-history. Obsidian from theses areas
was exploited and traded or transported on a large
scale from the Epi-Paleolithic to the Late Bronze
Age. Since the pioneering interdisciplinary work of
C. Renfrew (1966), archaeometrical approaches to
source attribution have developed in many directions,
involving a multiplication of methods and techniques
and laboratories. The absence of sufficient coordination
in the sampling strategies, in the establishment of a
real geological reference collection, and in assembling
databases with the results of chemical analyses both
for geological and archaeological items, is becoming
striking (Gratuze et al. 2005, Delerue 2007, Poupeau
et al. 2007, Hancock and Carter 2010). The integration
of results from diverse projects and methodologies
is a significant challenge to further work on obsidian
diffusion in Anatolia, the Near-East and Cyprus,
necessary for investigating the mobility of ancient
groups, reconstructing exchange networks, and for
understanding the role of the Central Anatolian
plateau in the economic and social fabrics of the
Neolithic.
When research first began in the Göllü Dağ
area, the complexity of the massif, the intricate
series of eruption events, and the richness of sites,
workshops and other archaeological remains was
far greater than could have been imagined when
studying assemblages found in sites, in Cyprus for
instance, hundreds of kilometers from the source.
Moreover, labels such as ‘ Göllü Dağ’ – ‘Kaletepe’,
‘Bitlikeler’, ‘Ekinlik’ or ‘Nenezi Dağ’ used in
chemical characterization do not adequately describe
of the number and diversity of individual obsidian
outcrops within the volcanic area. Fieldwork, including
detailed obsidian dyke identification, geomorphological study, and the use of GIS to organize archaeological and geological data are needed to establish
the background for understanding human occupations
and mobility in the obsidian procurement zone as
well as for understanding links to each location of
the diffusion zone, starting with Cappadocia and
Central Anatolia.
The third campaign of survey in the Göllü Dağ
massif took place in 2009. Our primary aim this
year was to cover an area comprised between Bozköy,
Gösterli and Kayırlı (Fig. 1). Three large workshops
were already known in this area. The Ilbiz-Bozköy
workshop is found near to a source of good quality
Anatolia Antiqua XVIII (2010), p. 191-202
Nur BALKAN-ATLI *, Steve KUHN **, Laurence ASTRUC***,
Nurcan KAYACAN * , Berkay DİNÇER**** and Gökhan ÇAKAN *
GÖLLÜ DAĞ SURVEY 20091
*) Istanbul University, Prehistory Department.
**) Arizona University.
***) CNRS, IFEA, Istanbul.
****) Archaeology Department, Uludağ University.
1) The 2009 survey was done with the collaboration of Dr. Çiler Altınbilek-Algül and Dr. Semra Yıldırm-Balcı who joined us for
several days and the hard and constant work of all the members of the KAOP, being Ezgi Avar, Gizem Dertürk, Merve Yurtsever, Okan
Sezer, Yıldıray Saruhan, Emel Yıldırım, Volkan Tamer, Özgür Toprak (2007-2008). The Ministry of Culture was represented by
İbrahim Sezer Zehra Taşkıran from Çankırı Anatolian Civilizations Museum. The maps were made by Yasin Çakan, the photograps
were taken by Berkay Dinçer and the illustrations were executed by Michel Grenet and Zehra Taşkıran. Many thanks to each of them.obsidian exposures at Müne’nin Yeri. Unipolar
débitage is dominant and much of the workshop
debris has been attributed to the Late Neolithic or
Chalcolithic. In Kayırlı, further to the north-east,
two huge multi-period workshops – the richest found
so far, with remains dated from Lower Paleolithic
to post-Chalcolitic periods – have been recognized.
This complex of workshops and outcrops has been
divided into two areas: Bitlikeler on the east and
Ekinlik on the west side of a deep ravine (BalkanAtlı et al. 2008, Balkan-Atlı et al. 2009). However,
the large area between Ilbiz-Bozköy, Gösterli and
Kayırlı had not been subject to systematic field reconnaissance. Our purpose this year was to conduct
systematic pedestrian survey of this area, which
shows a diversity of landforms in order to identify
new obsidian outcrops and possibly related workshops,
to recognize new shelters or settlements and to
recover new data that would help trace the mobility
of ancient groups within the Göllü Dağ complex. In
this paper we summarize archaeological and geoarchaeological findings from different parts of the
survey area.
GEOLOGICAL SOURCES
A substantial amount of work was been completed
on the obsidian sources (Fig. 2a) with samples collected from 29 new localities in the Bozköy, Kayırlı,
Gösterli areas. A geological reference collection is
being assembled for three reasons: to better understand
the diversity of the Göllü Dağ volcanic complex
and the relation between the different eruptive events
and the position and chemical composition of the
obsidian dykes; to build a secure geo-referenced
database of obsidian sources in the area that can be
used for provenience analysis of obsidian archaeological samples in Cappadocia, Anatolia and in the
Near-East; and, to provide an empirical basis to
study the relation between the choices of ancient
groups to use different raw material according to
their mechanical properties (in correlation with the
major and minor chemical elements of the obsidians)
and/or accessibility in the landscape.
DISTRIBUTION OF FINDS
Paleolithic artifacts are widespread throughout
the Göllü Dağ volcanic complex. However, the
nature of the Paleolithic finds, and the contexts in
which they occur, vary across the area (Fig. 2b).
The area surveyed in 2009 can be divided into
several general zones according to the nature of
finds from different periods and the geological and
topographic contexts in which they occur: 1) Akcağıl
Deresi, north of Bozköy, 2) Ridges and drainages
between Genvenlik Tepesi and Kayırlı/Gösterli,
3) Karakuz Tepesi and Yaprak Tepesi, 4) Kötüyaylı,
Karakuyu, Derebaşı, 5) Küçük Göllü Tepe, 6) The
upper reaches of Gökdere, and 7) The mouths of
Nohutlu dere and Gökdere, and slopes between. In
strong contrast, the distribution of Holocene cultural
remains is for the most part directly related to
obsidian outcrops (Fig. 2c). We will emphasize finds
and locations in two of the previously identified
contexts: 2) Ridges and drainages between Genvenlik
tepesi and Kayırlı/Gösterli and 6) the upper reaches
of Gökdere.
Akcağıl Deresi, north of Bozköy
The Akcağıl Deresi area consists of low-lying
slopes and drainage bottoms north of Bozköy. Natural
obsidian is found only as scattered, small nodules.
There is very little Neolithic or later material. Paleolithic finds, mainly Middle Paleolithic, are usually
associated with deposits of brownish reworked ash
containing with abundant clasts of volcanic stones
10-15 cm in diameter. Typical finds include Levallois
cores, some retouched tools and small (8-10 cm) bifaces of basalt and obsidian. The Paleolithic artifacts
generally exhibit high levels of patina and surface
erosion, likely indicating a prolonged residence on
the surface.
192 NUR BALKAN-ATLI et alii
Fig. 1 : Göllü Dağ survey 2007, 2008 and 2009.Ridges and drainages between
Genvenlik Tepesi and Kayırlı/Gösterli
The ridge tops, slopes, add drainages between
Genvenlik Tepesi and Kayırlı/Gösterli are comparatively rich in sites of all periods: localities recorded
include small obsidian sources, Neolithic/Chalcolithic
workshops, and Paleolithic findspots. As in Akcağıl
Deresi, Paleolithic artifacts are often associated with
exposures of brownish reworked ash with volcanic
stones. Much of the Paleolithic material is patinated
or eroded, indicating long residence time on the surface. Several sites yielded relatively large, minimally
prepared discoid and Levallois cores which could
represent an earlier Middle or even Lower Paleolithic
component. One especially rich locality (366) contained comparatively fresh-looking obsidian Levallois
cores as well as handaxes. Two other localities (445,
446), situated at foot of basalt promontory northwest
of Gevenlik Tepesi, are notable for presence of
many Levallois flakes and heavily retouched flake
tools. These latter sites appear more like habitations
than production locales. At the east side of the
ravine leading to the north at the foot of Gevenlik
Tepesi, elements which might be attributed to Epipaleolithic or early Neolithic of Epipaleolithic
tradition (?) were collected (359, 360).
The slopes and top of Kalebaşı Tepe, just south
of Gösterli are an exception to the general description
above. Artifacts, mainly flakes and amorphous cores,
are widely scattered. There are a few sparse concentrations associated with natural shelters on the eastern
slopes of the hill. Natural obsidian is present in the
form of isolated nodules and very small fragments,
but no usable sources were identified.
Concerning Holocene finds, on the west side of
Bozköy-Kayırlı road we recorded a probable Chalcolithic site with grinding stones, ceramics and obsidian flakes (417). On the east side of the road, associated with obsidian outcrops, is a workshop
which shows a very peculiar unipolar débitage resulting in production of twisted bladelets (381).
This ‘chaîne opératoire’ has never been identified
before in the Göllü Dağ area. It is very distinctive
and might become a good chronological marker if it
is recognized in the well stratified and dated sites of
the region.
The Gösterli area, which we visited only briefly,
showed material of real interest with clearly Neolithic material found above the dere of Gösterli
(i.e. Bunuş ?) and Chalcolithic pottery in the bottom
dere. In both locations we collected assemblages of
different kind of obsidian coming from the Göllü
Dağ and the Nenezi Dağ. The area of Gösterli is a
high priority for further exploration in the future.
Karakuz Tepesi and Yaprak Tepesi
Around Karakuz Tepesi and Yaprak Tepesi, Paleolithic findspots are few and highly dispersed.
The material present seems to represent long-term
accumulations on stable or eroding surfaces, rather
than real concentrations of artifacts. An exception is
one remarkable locality on a low ridge at intersection
of two drainages, north-east of Karakuz Tepesi, and
immediately west of rich obsidian sources on the
Ekinlik ridge. This site (392) contains material from
several periods, including Middle Paleolithic, Neolithic
and later (ceramic) periods. The Middle Paleolithic
component is represented by beautifully executed,
GÖLLÜ DAĞ SURVEY 2009 193
Fig. 2 : Findspots of the 2009 Göllü Dağ survey: a) Obsidian sources,
b) Paleolithic artifacts, c) Neolithic and post-Neolithic artifacts.
a) b) c)symmetrical Levallois cores, following “centripetal
recurrent” system of exploitation. These artifacts
show little patination or surface alteration, indicating
that they have recently been exposed. The quality of
the Levallois production is unique for survey area
although a single similar example recovered from
field on opposite side of Karakuz Tepesi.
Kötüyaylı, Karakuyu, Derebaşı
The Kötüyaylı, Karakuyu, and Derebaşı areas
have very good surface exposure and visibility of
the ground surface, but very little prehistoric material
is present either in the valley bottom (Kötüyaylı,
Karakuyu), or on the basalt escarpment (Derebaşı).
The more than 10 recorded findspots in the area are
mostly isolated finds or small scatters of cores and
flakes. No obsidian sources were recorded in the
area.
Küçük Göllü Tepe
The high slopes and summit of Küçük Göllü
Tepe contains very little material from any period.
A few isolated cores and flakes representing the Paleolithic and later periods were collected from the
area. Natural obsidian occurs only as very small
pieces, unsuitable for artifact manufacture.
The upper reaches of Gökdere
The upper reaches of Gökdere, between 1900
and 2100 m elevation, are very rich in obsidian outcrops as well as workshops. Concerning Neolithic /
Chalcolithic, the most exciting discovery was made
in the high ridges (between 1900 and 2100 m elevation) and slopes above the southern branch of
Gökdere. The area contains several large obsidian
sources associated with extensive workshops, completely undocumented until this year. Two small
shelters with archaeological sediments – rare in the
study area – were found at proximity of the outcrops.
Most of the material found in the workshops and in
one of the shelter dates to the Holocene. Paleolithic
finds are found as well in the area, particularly at localities 483 and 486.
Obsidian sources can be described as follows:
476 is a small outcrop, at the bottom of a recent adjacent dere; 480 A and 480 B are very rich exposures
with large blocks and nodules, near the top of the
dere; 480 C, an exposure at the top of the ridge, not
exposed by the dere erosion, with tabular pieces,
oriented vertically, and, outcrops with nodules on
the slopes below.
A series of small caves and rockshelters below a
rhyolite cliff on the southeastern slopes of Necibin
Yatak Sırtı (477, Fig. 3a-3b) have been identified.
The openings are 2-4 m wid e and 1-2 m high. The
slopes in front of them contains abundant
Neolithic/Chalcolithic material, including blade
cores, blades and bladelets. There is not much level
area in front of these rockshelters, but there may
have been more before the downcutting of Gökdere.
At least one of the caves does contain sediment,
which is full of blades and flakes. The shelters face
south and southwest. The collected assemblage is
composed of unipolar production, including roughouts, cores showing at least a partial shaping, blades
and flakes.
Locality 481 is the extensive scatter of workshop
debris on the ridge above the sources (Fig. 4). Three
points were taken, representing the east and west
edges and the center of the workshop distribution.
Flaking debris is extremely abundant, in some places
completely covering the ground surface. Unipolar
194 NUR BALKAN-ATLI et alii
Fig. 3 a-b : Rockshelter 477.
a) b)core production testifies of rather expedient technology, with a flat platform at 90 degrees to the face
of detachment. Shaping is minimal with an opportunist
use of the morphology of the block. Elongated
blanks are irregular and not standardized both in
shape and size.
Locality 483 (Fig. 5a-5b) is a small cave near
the top of the southern slope of the dere, below the
main workshops. It opens to the northeast. The cave
is nearly full of sediment, and there appear to be additional deposits on the slope below. An illegal excavation has enlarged the opening, and the cave appears to extend back at least 3 or 4 meters. The area
around the mouth and the slopes below it is covered
with blades and blade cores. There are also dense
workshop deposits above the cave. The collected
assemblage is Holocene, composed of a very irregular
bifacial “Çatal preform” abandoned because of the
presence of perlite inclusions, and, material representing unipolar production with rough-outs, unipolar
cores, and various non standardized blanks. At least
one Levallois flake and several patinated flakes and
cores came from the sediment unearthed by the
illegal excavation.
Site 486 is located in the upper bank of a steeply
eroded side dere, just below a large obsidian exposure.
The slopes contain abundant Middle Paleolithic material, especially Levallois cores. These appear to
be eroding out from 1-2 meters below the crest of
the ridge. Although the cores are patinated they are
not rounded, so they may have been buried quickly.
The sample is also unusual in that most the cores
were exploited using a unipolar convergent strategy,
unusual for the study area. Neolithic/Chalcolithic
artefacts include products from unipolar débitage
with poor shaping, as is well represented in this
area.
The mouths of Nohutlu Dere and Gökdere,
and slopes between
The alluvial fans at the mouths of Nohutlu Dere
and Gökdere, and the slopes between them are
deeply dissected by recent erosion. The area is very
rich in natural obsidian blocks and nodules, some
quite large, eroded from exposures higher in the
drainage. The alluvial fan at the mouth of Gökdere
is covered with natural obsidian in some places.
Tested nodules, Levallois cores and occasional
finished artifacts are widely scattered across the uneroded surfaces. These artifacts seldom occur in
large enough concentrations to merit identification
as a site. Instead, the surface deposits seem to
represent generalized use of the area over a long period.
DISCUSSION
As in previous years the majority of Paleolithic
finds from the Göllü Dağ area refer to the Middle
Paleolithic sensu lato. These include Levallois cores
(more than 200 examples), Levallois flakes and
blades, and a range of side-scrapers and points,
GÖLLÜ DAĞ SURVEY 2009 195
Fig. 4 : Workshop 481.
Fig. 5 a-b : Cave 483.
a)
b)Artifact form Obsidian Basalt Other Total
Core tools
Small biface (< 8cm) 13 9 22
Large biface/ handaxe 9 13 1 23
Cleaver 1 2 1 4
Other core tools 11 4 15
Disc 1 1
Chopper/core 4 1
Fragments 1
Cores
Levallois core 205 2 207
Blade/bladelet core 3 3
Core on flake 8 8
Discoid core 12 3 2 17
Other core forms 95 95
Core fragment 28 28
Truncated/faceted piece 3 3
Retouched tools
Simple & double
sidescraper 41 1 42
Déjeté scraper 1 1 2
Transverse scraper 11 1 12
Bifacial scraper 1
Limace 1
Convergent sidescraper/
point 7 1 8
Endscraper 3 3
Notch 2 2
Denticulate 3 3
Indet. retouched piece and
fragments 28 1 29
Flakes and blades
Levallois flake/blade 47 1 48
Eclat debordant 6 6
Plain flake 105 8 1 114
Plain blade 18 18
Biface flake 1
Total 667 49 6 713
identified based on blank form, characteristic retouch,
and patina. Artifacts clearly attributable to the Lower
Paleolithic (Acheulean) include large bifacial handaxes
and cleavers. Some large discoid and “proto-Levallois”
cores, as well as large, heavily patinated flake tools
may also be attributable to the Lower Paleolithic
(Table 1).
Handaxes and other core tools (Fig. 6-7) are the
most common basalt artifacts, but we also recovered
discoid and Levallois cores and large flake tools of
this material. The presence of both large bifaces and
flake production on basalt may be linked to the
presence of high-quality basalt within the area surveyed in 2009. Although we did note several large
exposures of fine-grained basalt, no workshops or
production areas were observed.
As in previous years, both small (< 8 cm) and
large (> 8 cm) bifacial handaxes were collected the
study area. It is probable that these artifacts refer to
different periods. The small specimens come mainly,
though not exclusively, from sites between Bozköy
and the Akcağıl Deresi. They are more often made
of obsidian than basalt, are generally fully shaped
on both faces, and are frequently associated with
Levallois cores. It is hypothesized that the smaller
handaxes are Middle Paleolithic in age. In contrast,
larger handaxes and cleavers are more often made
on basalt, and many are made on large flakes, with
extensive shaping on one face only. The recovery of
several large cleavers, never before found on surface
in the survey area, is also noteworthy. Technologically,
the larger handaxes and cleavers are consistent with
the distinctive “Large Flake” Acheulean assemblages
collected from levels V-XII at Kaletepe Deresi 3.
Apparently, the early Acheulean occupation of the
Göllü Dağ area was fairly widespread, although in
situ deposits are seldom preserved or exposed.
Levallois cores (Fig. 8) are by far the most common type of Paleolithic artifacts found in the Göllü
Dağ area (Table 1)2. Most unidentified fragments
also appear to be pieces of Levallois cores. A wide
range of Levallois core forms and systems of exploitation is represented in the sample (Table 2)3 .
As in the 2008 sample, the most common system is
characterized by production of large “preferential”
flakes. Unipolar and “centripetal recurrent” productions are second and third in order of abundance:
other systems of Levallois production are considerably
less common. Although the diversity of Levallois
cores is high in the sample as a whole, some localities
are dominated by a single Levallois system (e.g.,
sites 392, 486). At least some assemblages with a
single Levallois system are also characterized by
fresh, lightly-patinated artifacts. This suggests that
material was not exposed on the surface for a long
period, and that the site may contain a single, rapidly
buried Middle Paleolithic component.
2) Only artifacts that could be attributed to the Paleolithic period(s) with a high degree of certainty are included. Non-diagnostic
flakes and blades are not included, unless the degree of patina and surface alteration or other features indicated that they pre-date the
Neolithic period.
3) Specimens for which system of exploitation could not be ascertained are not included.
196 NUR BALKAN-ATLI et alii
Table 1 : Paleolithic artifacts from the 2009
Göllü Dağ survey, by raw material.GÖLLÜ DAĞ SURVEY 2009 197
Fig. 6 : Basalt bifacial cleaver.
Fig. 7 : Basalt handaxe.The presence of an Upper Paleolithic occupation
is still in question in the Göllü Dağ area as no clear
remains have been identified. It may simply be
difficult to recognize materials from this period in
the absence of habitation sites with a range of tool
forms. Small, amorphous bladelet cores and patinated
endscrapers, with possible Upper/Epi-Paleolithic
forms, were collected from sites 345 and 348. Several
other bladelet cores were found but no associated
microliths: these include a semi-peripherical bladelet
core with a flat natural back, a “carenated” bladelet
core and a bladelet core on a shaping flake with the
débitage surface on one edge. It is at the stage of research still difficult to attribute these remains to
either the Epi-Paleolithic or the early Neolithic of
Epi-Paleolithic tradition as the assemblages of Pınarbaşı, Aşıklı and Boncuklu in Central Anatolia
are still in the course of publication.
Chronological or cultural attribution of Holocene
finds is also difficult. There is scarcity of formal, typologically classifiable tools, and a near complete
absence of chronological markers for Holocene
periods (Table 3).
One small fragment of a probable Neolithic arrowhead on a bipolar blade bearing pressure retouch,
and a rough Chalcolithic bifacial preform were collected in 2009. Generalized, non-diagnostic shaped
tools were found in many loci. The list given above
does not include tools that bore obvious post-depositional damage.
There is a striking scarcity of techno-typological
analyses of assemblages from the excavated stratified
Neolithic and post-Neolithic sites of the region,
which hinders our attempts to place survey materials
in chronological position. No strict relation is found
between formal tools and the morphological or technological characters of the blanks. These scarce
lithic elements do however show activities other
than knapping took place even in workshops. They
illustrate the daily toolkit of groups that occupied
the area even seasonally. To complete the picture,
one must add the numerous hammers made of
rhyolite used in indirect percussion from the IlbizBozköy workshops, first recognized by M. Grenet.
But they are not specific to this workshop as a comparable specimen made of obsidian was been recognized this year in Bitlikeler. Experiments will allow
198 NUR BALKAN-ATLI et alii
PATINA
Light Moderate Heavy
surface surface surface
Levallois system alteration alteration alteration Total
Preferential flake 11 28 27 66
Unipolar 5 25 15 45
Centripetal recurrent 9 19 10 38
Orthogonal preferential 0 6 3 9
Opposed preferential 3 7 5 15
Bipolar 2 3 4 9
Convergent 1 7 3 11
Total 31 95 67 193
Table 2 : Levallois cores from the 2009 Göllü Dağ survey,
listed according to system of exploitation and degree of
surface alteration.
Fig. 8 : Obsidian Levallois core.us to understand the use of these tools either for
quarrying or for knapping, as some of them might
have been used as punches.
As regards technology, the dominant component
throughout the 2009 surveyed area consists of
unipolar production manifesting a rather low level
of skill compared with, for example, naviform technology. The sizes and morphologies of the obsidian
blocks in the outcrops had a great deal of influence
on the forms of cores (Fig. 8-10). Shaping sequences
are very limited: they are mainly restricted to the
opening of the platform (with angle from 65° to
more than 90°), although natural platforms are not
rare. Natural surfaces or cortical areas are often preserved both on cores and related flakes and blades.
Products are in general of small dimensions, elongated
and irregular in shape, with plain butts. In most
cases there is a main unipolar sequence of extraction
followed by one or several opposed or crossed
unipolar removals (Fig. 9-10). Several flat cores
with opposed unipolar sequences have been recovered
this year. Fig. 11 shows, for example, an eroded
specimen of a shaped core with the extraction of
two opposed unipolar series. The varieties of unipolar
production observed in the Göllü Dağ area and the
stratified sites of the region will have to be further
studied in order to build a real correspondence
between the post-Neolithic workshops and sites.
At the present it seems that Neolithic workshops
such as Kaletepe-Kömürcü or Kayırlı (BitlikelerEkinlik), with a large proportion of bipolar and naviform débitage, are fairly rare in the Göllü Dağ
area. Isolated blades or even rough-outs are occasionally recovered, but it is difficult to see in them
as more than the testimony of the mobility of
knappers, hunters or villagers in the landscape. Remains of unipolar débitage using pressure technique
are found at these two workshops and at a few other
findspots: this year, an isolated complete bladelet
GÖLLÜ DAĞ SURVEY 2009 199
Typology Blank Number of
Sites
Arrowhead Blade 1
Bifacial preform Flake 3
End-scraper Blade 2
Side-scraper Flake 1
Circular scraper Flake 1
End-scraper and Lateral retouch Flake 3
Burin Flake 1
Truncation Blade 3
Truncation and Lateral retouch Blade 4
Truncation and ‘Pièce esquillée’ Blade 1
Notches and lateral retouch Shaping flake 1
Lateral retouch Flake 6
Lateral retouch (by pressure) Flake 1
Lateral retouch Shaping Flake 1
Lateral retouch Blade 5
Lateral retouch Bladelet 2
Backed piece Flake 2
Pièce esquillée Flake 10
Pièce esquillée Shaping Flake 1
Pièce esquillée Opening platform 1
Pièce esquillée Blade 1
Pièce esquillée and lateral retouch Flake 1
Table 3 : Typology for Neolithic/Chalcolithic
and even later sites.
Fig. 9 : Frontal unipolar production on a core
showing a partial shaping.
Fig. 10 : Crossed unipolar series on an
unshaped core.found together with a fragment of blade core of
good quality, testifying to the presence of a Neolithic
occupation in a settlement which is above Gösterli
Dere.
Although the distribution of early Neolithic
workshops is restricted, the number of apparent
post-Neolithic workshops increases every year. Ilbiz-Bozköy remains rather peculiar, with its very
homogeneous unipolar production attributed to late
Neolithic or Chalcolithic periods (Balkan et al.
2008). The workshops found at Hamid’in Yeri are
so extended in surface that they remind us in this respect of the Kayırlı area. The 2007 systematic collections can be preliminarily attributed mostly to
late Neolithic, Chacolithic or even later periods. For
the 2009 season, we emphasize the importance of
the documentation in the area of Gökdere of multiple
previously unknown sources, workshops and shelters
that must be further explored: the surface collection
does not suggest date before to the Late Neolithic
however.
CONCLUSIONS
The 2009 Göllü Dağ Survey allowed to explore
a range of surfaces, landscape elements, locations
which had not been covered before (Balkan et al.
2008, 2009). Given the geomorphologic complexity
of the Göllü Dağ area, the fact that we found completely unknown outcrops and related workshops
was expected. The 2009 survey allowed us as well
to enlarge the list of shelters with archaeological
material, especially in the area of Gökdere.
The distribution of artifacts varies broadly by
time period. The Lower Paleolithic is represented
by isolated find spots yielding one or two handaxes
and cleavers. In contrast, Middle Paleolithic remains
are practically ubiquitous in the Göllü Dağ area,
and often quite concentrated. Levallois cores and
other artifacts typically appear in concentrations associated with exposures of natural obsidian in primary
or secondary contexts. Farther from raw material
sources, locations contain more Levallois flakes and
retouched tools, while cores are comparatively few
in number. The pattern of distribution is radically
different in Holocene, with large workshops at immediate proximity of sources. These workshops are
often multi-period but each of them shows its own
unique characteristics in size, position in the Göllü
Dağ complex, topographical characteristic, the presence of associated rock-shelters, and lithic assemblages
and corresponding periods of use. Several settlements,
200 NUR BALKAN-ATLI et alii
Fig. 11 : Two opposed unipolar series extracted from a flat shaped core.with ceramics and groundstone as well as obsidian
artifacts, have also been identified. A few isolated
finds, especially of arrow or spear heads, show the
mobility of Neolithic and later groups within the
area. The ‘scarcity’ of Upper Paleolithic or Epi-Paleolithic in the Göllü Dağ area is difficult to interpret.
It is possible that sediments of the appropriate age
are either not preserved or not exposed. The absence
of stratified and dated assemblages from the surrounding area, and the ubiquity of different varieties
of blade production representing later periods makes
it difficult to attribute surface finds to the Upper Paleolithic and Epi-paleolithic. As a consequence, it
would be premature to interpret this scarcity of
material as evidence that Upper Paleolithic populations
were absent from or seldom visited the Göllü Dağ
area.
From the technological point of view, results
from the 2009 survey also highlight pronounced
differences in raw material procurement through
time. There appear to be larger numbers and a
greater variety of basalt artifacts on the western and
northern parts of the Göllü Dağ complex than in
areas surveyed in previous years. Lower Paleolithic
hominids selected both obsidian and basalts for producing large tools, whereas Middle Paleolithic hominids exploited obsidians almost exclusively. Toolmakers of the latter period often selected small,
lenticular nodules or tabular pieces of raw material,
even where larger fragments were available. The
range in quality and execution of Levallois technology
within the study area, and the selection of “preformed” nodules shows that Middle Paleolithic
artisans were able to exploit core volumes using a
well-understood geometry and not simply following
a fixed set of procedures.
During the Neolithic, the interest in differential
flaking properties of obsidians increased and led to
the deliberate selection of very specific raw materials,
such as the one found at Kaletepe-Kömürcü, to
execute highly standardized naviform and unipolar
production. From these ‘chaînes opératoires’ to the
rather simple unipolar débitage identified at several
localities in the 2009 surveyed area, the technical
input varies tremendously. There is no deterministic
link between the morphologies and mechanical properties of raw materials and their exploitation to
fulfill technical needs, but there are some interesting
correlations which must be further studied.
In parallel with the archaeological survey, fully
mapping the distribution of obsidian dykes, investigating the relationships between erosional processes
and the distribution of cultural remains, and understanding the general geomorphologic complexity of
the Göllü Dağ massif are all important priorities for
future research. Further research will also focus on
nearby Nenezidağ, another very important center
for obsidian acquisition and diffusion.
N.B.-A. et al.
AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was realized with the permission of
the Department of Cultural Assets and Museums,
Ministry of Tourism and Culture. It was supported
financially by the Research Find of Istanbul University
(project n° 3539) with scientific help from l’ANR
(Project ANR-08-BLAN-0318). We are grateful to
these institutions.
GÖLLÜ DAĞ SURVEY 2009 201
REFERENCES
Balkan-Atlı, N., Binder D. and Gratuze, B., 2008 :
“Göllü Dağ (Central Anatolia) : ObsidianSources, Workshops and Trade”, in Y. Ünsal (ed), Anatolian Metal IV,
Bochum : 203-210.
– 2008 : “Göllü Dağ 2007 Survey”, Anatolia Antiqua
XVI : 293-312.
– 2009 : “Göllü Dağ 2008 Survey”, Anatolia Antiqua
XVII : 301-315.
Cauvin, M.-C., Gourgaud, A., Gratuze, B., Poidevin,
J.L., Poupeau, G. and Chataignier, C. (éds), 1998 : L’obsidienne au Proche et Moyen Orient : du volcan à l’outil,
Lyon, Maison de l’Orient Méditerranéen, Oxford, B.A.R
Inter. Ser. 738.
Chataignier, C., 1998 : “Sources des artefacts du
Proche-Orient d’après la caractérisation géochimique des
artefacts archéologiques”, in M.-C. Cauvin et al. 1998 :
273-324.
Coqueugniot, E., 1998 : “L’obsidienne en Méditerranée
orientale aux époques post-néolithiques”, in Cauvin M.C. et al. 1998 : 351-362.
Delerue, S., 2007 : L’obsidienne dans le processus
de néolithisation du Proche-Orient (12000-6500 B.C.),
Thèse de doctorat, Université de Bordeaux, France.
Gratuze, B., Boucetta, S., Binder, D., Balkan-Atlı,
N., Bellot-Gurlet, L. and Mouralis, D., 2005 : New Investigations of the Gollu-Dag Obsidian Lava Flows
System : Comparison between Chemical, Mineralogical,
and Fission Track Data, Highlights from the 2003 International Specialized Workshop : Recent Advances in Obsidian Dating and Characterization, Melos, Greece. Or-ganized by the Laboratory of Archaeometry, University
of the Aegean and the International Association for
Obsidian Studies. IAOS Bulletin 33 : 18.
Güleç, E., White, T., Howell, F. C., Özer, I., Sağır,
M., Yılmaz, H. and Kuhn, S., 2009 : “The Lower
Pleistocene Lithic Assemblage from Dursunlu (Konya),
central Anatolia, Turkey”, Antiquity 83 : 11-22.
Hancock, R.G.V. and Carter, T., 2010 : “How reliable
are our archaeometric data ? Effects of analytical techniques
through time on the elemental analysis of obsidian”,
Journal of Archaeological Science, Vol. 37/2 : 243-250.
Kuhn, S., in press : “Was Anatolia a bridge or a
barrier to early hominin dispersals ?”, Quaternary International.
Poupeau, G., Le Bourdonnec, F.X., Dubernet, S.,
Scorzelli, R. B., Duttine, M. et Carter T., 2007 : “Tendances
actuelles dans la caractérisation des obsidiennes pour les
études de provenance”, ArchéoSciences, Revue
d’Archéométrie 31 : 79-86.
Renfrew, C., Dixon, J. E., et Cann, J. R., 1966 : “Obsidian and early cultural contact in the Near East”, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, XXXII : 30-72.
Slimak, L., Kuhn, S. L., Roche, H., Mouralis, D.,
Buitenhuis, H., Balkan-Atlı, Binder, D., Kuzucuoğlu, C.
and Guillou, H., 2008 : “Kaletepe Deresi 3 (Turkey) : Archaeological evidence for early human settlement in
Central Anatolia”, Journal of Human Evolution 54 : 99111.
202 NUR BALKAN-ATLI et alii