See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260087117
PPN Pressure Technology: views from Anatolia
Chapter · January 2007
CITATIONS
15
READS
214
1 author:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
on the barremo-bedoulian cherts from south-eastern France, and Bergeracois evolution View project
réseau de lithothèques View project
Didier Binder
Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS
152 PUBLICATIONS 881 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Didier Binder on 08 May 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are added to the original document
and are linked to publications on ResearchGate, letting you access and read them immediately.PPN Pressure Technology:
Views from Anatolia
Didier Binder*
Abstract. During the last decades, many studies dedicated to pressure blade productions have shown its
interest as a cultural marker, and for understanding cultural and social dynamics during the Late Pleistocene
and Holocene. Recent work in Anatolia allowed us to precise the context and chronology of appearance of
these techniques and to analyse their variability and trend of evolution.
Currently, pressure blade technology appears quite suddenly during the Early PPNB, in the second half of the
9th millennium cal. BC: on one hand in the context of Cayönü tepesi Channelled buildings (Upper Mesopotamia), on the other hand in the Kaletepe obsidian workshop (Cappadocia).
Within Eastern Anatolia, evolution is fast: flint and obsidian micro-bladelets from semi-conical cores during
the EPPNB; preference for obsidian bladelets from frontal débitage obtained from flat inclined platforms during
the MPPNB; during the LPPNB débitage is more and more regular, wider and standardized, and pressure
débitage with a lever is used.
Within Central Anatolia, pressure débitage is used for obsidian that is diffused since the beginning of EPPNB
towards the Levantine Corridor and Cyprus; the débitage is frontal, from flat and moderately inclined platforms,
quite similar to Eastern Anatolia MPPNB modes. Pressure techniques, which disappeared from Central Anatolia
in the beginning of the 8th millennium with the development of the As ̧ıklı-Musular-Çatal höyük complex, come
back strongly in the middle of the 7 th millennium cal. BC, probably due to a reactivation of Eastern networks.
Keywords. High Mesopotamian valleys, Central Anatolia, PPNB, Pressure methods and techniques, Blade
technology.
Résumé. Le débitage par pression en Eurasie a fait depuis de nombreuses années l’objet d’études mettant
en évidence sa valeur de marqueur culturel et son intérêt pour la compréhension des dynamiques culturelles et sociales à la fin du Pléistocène et au cours de l’Holocène. Les travaux récents ont permis de préciser
le contexte et la chronologie d’apparition de ces techniques en Anatolie et d’analyser leurs variabilités et
tendances évolutives.
Il en ressort actuellement que la pression apparaît assez brutalement au PPNB ancien, au milieu ou dans la
seconde moitié du 9e millénaire cal. BC, d’une part dans le contexte des « Channelled buildings » de Cayönü
tepesi et d’autre part dans celui des exploitations artisanales d’obsidienne cappadocienne (Kaletepe atelier P).
En Anatolie orientale, l’évolution est rapide : débitage de micro-lamelles sur silex et obsidienne selon un
mode semi-conique au PPNB ancien ; débitage privilégié de lamelles d’obsidienne selon une modalité plus frontale à partir de plans de pression lisses extrêmement inclinés au PPNB moyen ; au PPNB récent les débitages sont
de plus en plus réguliers, de plus en plus larges et standardisés faisant parfois appel à la pression au levier.
En Anatolie centrale les débitages par pression sont dédiés à l’obsidienne qui est diffusée dès le début du
PPNB ancien dans le corridor levantin et à Chypre ; les modes de débitage, frontaux, à plan lisse modérément
incliné s’apparentent à ceux du PPNB moyen d’Anatolie orientale. Les méthodes de taille par pression, abandonnées en Anatolie centrale à partir des débuts du 8e millénaire avec la mise en place du complexe culturel
d’As ̧ıklı-Musular-Çatal höyük, réapparaissent avec force au milieu du 7 e millénaire, en lien probable avec la
réactivation de réseaux orientaux.
Mots-clés. Hautes vallées mésopotamiennes, Anatolie centrale, Néolithique précéramique B, méthodes et
techniques de débitage par pression, technologie laminaire.
* Centre d’études Préhistoire, Antiquité, Moyen Âge (CEPAM), Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, CNRS, 250 rue Albert-Einstein,
06560 Valbonne, France <binder.cepam.cnrs.fr>; http://www.cepam.cnrs.fr.
Systèmes techniques et communautés du Néolithique précéramique au Proche-Orient
Technical Systems and Near Eastern PPN Communities
sous la direction de Laurence Astruc, Didier Binder et François Briois
Éditions APDCA, Antibes, 2007, p. 235-243
235Didier Binder
236
The interest of pressure blade technology for understanding Eurasian and North African Pleistocene and
Holocene traditions within chipped stone industries
has been underlined by different authors during the
last decades (e.g. Inizan, 1988; Inizan and Lechevallier,
1994; Inizan, Lechevallier et al., 1990; Pelegrin, 1988,
2003; Tixier, 1976; and various contributions in Tixier,
Inizan et al., 1984).
Pressure blade production techniques and methods
show great differences throughout time and space,
which is of a particular interest for discussing cultural
identity and transfers as well as social organization and
complexity.
PPN productions of blades and bladelets, using pressure techniques, have been documented in Central
Anatolia (Kaletepe, Kayırlı...) as well as in Eastern
Anatolia (Çayönü tepesi, Cafer höyük...). This paper
deals with the variability of these productions and tries
to define trends within pressure technology evolution.
originS
Pressure bladelet production is are supposed to be
common in Eastern Mesopotamia, at least during the
last third of the 10th millennium cal. BC (M’lefaat) and
during the first half of the 9 th millennium (Nemrik 9).
The origins of these methods are probably to be found
in the Central Asian Upper Paleolithic (e.g. Aq Kupruk,
Afghanistan) or in the Caucasus (Sosruko, Azerbaïdjan)
and to be considered overall as a heritage of the Eastern
Asian traditions, Yubetsu and Gobi (Brunet, 2002;
Inizan, Lechevallier, 1994; Inizan, Lechevallier et al.,
1990; Inizan, Tixier, 2001).
In Eastern Mesopotamia, the data suggest the predominance of conical débitage processes, leading to bullet core shapes, using flint as well as obsidian. As the
heat treatment is attested in M’lefaat and Nemrik as well
(Inizan, Tixier, 2001), one can suggest that the bimodality of the blade width distribution observed in PPN
Nemrik (Kozłowski, 2002) could correspond to a separation between heat-treated and non-heat treated productions or even to different sub-phases within a single
“chaîne opératoire”. Such a dichotomy – with quite the
same ranges – had already been identified in very different contexts (Binder, 1984).
The situation seems to be similar in the Northern
Levant (Abbès, Belot-Gurlet et al., 2001). The question
of pressure cores at Mureybet III and Early Abu Hureira
is discussed.
In Mureybet III, one broken obsidian core could
have been knapped in that way (Cauvin, 1991, fig. 5, 3,
p. 168), but recently M.C. Cauvin doubted the presence
of pressure techniques in this context. This piece was
introduced in the settlement as a pre-core, probably
from Cappadocia according to our current knowledge
of obsidian diffusion within the PPNA or PPNA-PPNB
transition; but some Eastern Anatolian obsidian is also
known during this phase and the core provenience has
to be checked.
In Abu Hureira, conical obsidian pressure cores, as
well as blades, are present (Moore et al. 1975) but recent
papers (e.g. Moore, 2000) let suspect that obsidian bladelets coming from the earliest phases could be intrusive, due to many perturbations.
eaStern anatolia evidenCeS
for PreSSure
Regarding the development of technological studies
within Neolithic Central Anatolia (Binder, Balkan-Atlı,
2001), new work has been recently carried out on the
Çayönü series (Binder, submitted). Actually this settlement is of a major interest for understanding neolithization processes in the High Mesopotamian Valleys
(Balkan-Atlı, 1994; Braidwood, Braidwood, 1982;
Caneva, Conti et al., 1994; Caneva, Lemorini et al., 1996,
1998; Özdogˇan, 1999; Özdogˇan, Balkan-Atlı, 1994).
EPPNB
During the early stages of Cayönü, probably equivalent to the PPNA and the beginning of EPPNB, we
don’t know of any local pressure production in Anatolia,
either in the contexts of Round houses nor in the Grill
building sub-phases; these results are in contradiction
with previous papers (i.e. Özdogˇan, Balkan-Atlı, 1994).
Actually, as far as we know, pressure methods appear in
Eastern Anatolia within the Channelled building subphase of Cayonu tepesi (fig. 1).
This sub-phase could be dated late, probably from
the second part of the 9th millenium cal. BC (8500-8250
cal. BC, EPPNB) considering (i) the radiocarbon measurements available for the basal pits related to the Early
Grill sub-phase (8700-8500 cal. BC, EPPNB) and (ii) the
hypothesis that it could be more or less contemporary
with the Early Nevalı Çori.
No artifact could be attributed to pressure processes in the previous stages corresponding to the Round
houses and Grill buildings, even within the Late Grill
building sub-phase.
0 5 cm
Fig. 1. Core shaped from a flake of pink white dotted bioclastic
flint; Channelled building sub-phase (EPPNB).PPN Pressure Technology: Views from Anatolia
237
During the Channelled building sub-phase, pressure
predominates among the knapping techniques: considering the series from courtyard 20M-7 & 8, 111 items
(64%) are detached by pressure. Three main raw material categories are used for this purpose: obsidian (51%),
buff detritic local flint (23%) and pink flint imported as
flakes to be shaped into “bullet-cores” (less than 5%).
Obsidian width distribution seems to be bimodal with
a first set between 8.5 mm and 13 mm (bladelets) and
a second between 4 mm and 8.5 mm (micro-bladelets);
the thickness of the latter group is always less than
2 mm. Most of the wider pieces are central ones (including ca. half of 212’ pieces, fig. 2) without any shaping
out scars, and made from high quality obsidian probably
imported as selected products. Few of the narrow ones
are from low quality obsidian, collected as small river
pebbles. Visible platforms (n=16) are flat (n=9), facetted, dihedral or concave (n=7); 1/3 of the cornices are
blunted.
Buff flint was used mainly for bladelets with a width
range of 8-12 mm. These bladelets where locally produced on conical cores with normal facetted platforms,
without any evidence of heat treatment. It needs to
be determined whether the pre-cores had really been
shaped out of thick flakes.
Pink flint was only used for micro-bladelets with a
width range of 4-8.5 mm and a very reduced thickness
(less than 2 mm). Despite this suggestive pink color,
there’s no evidence of heat treatment; but we have to
take in account that the natural outcrops of this pink
flint are not yet defined (maybe the heating produces
a change in color and not in glossy, this requires experimentation). Micro-bladelets were obviously produced
from semi-conical or conical cores shaped out from
flakes; some of the exhausted cores are quite close to
typical bullet-cores, but residue of the inferior face of
the original flake can often be observed, indicating that
the débitage is not totally peripheral. I have already suggested that copper, commonly in use at Cayönü at that
time (Özdogˇan, 1999), could be used for these detachments, considering the bulbs, the precise definition of
the contact area and the overhanging cornice of the bladelets, which is only rarely reduced (Pelegrin, 1994).
According to J. Pelegrin’s and P. Wilke’s papers and
experiments (Pelegrin, 1988; Wilke, 1996), the microbladelet production could be easily done within the
hand; the wider series, and especially those on buff
flint could have been knapped with a small shoulder or
abdominal crutch. Such a bimodality seems to be quite
close to that seen for Zagros – Nemrik, with a question mark concerning the use of heat treatment. The
idea of a close relationship between Iraqi and Cayönü
Channelled building sub-phase traditions is consistent
but needs further examples.
MPPNB
Despite the fact that the sample from the Cobble
paved building sub-phase (Building CM, beginning of
the 8 th millennium cal. BC?) is quite small, pressure
technique is clearly attested there by 52 items (20% of
the blade production).
The major part of the bladelet set is from obsidian
(56%). Visible butts are often flat, rarely punctiform and
abraded or dihedral. On the contrary of the Channelled
building sub-phase, there is a lack of obsidian micro-
bladelets. Bladelets constitute two sub-groups: medium
size, with a width range between 8.5 mm and 13 mm;
large size between 13 mm and 16 mm. Two pieces of obsidian coming from another sample previously published
(Caneva, Lemorini et al., 1996) show a bladelet production including rather wide pieces and the corresponding opening platforms.
Local buff flints are few (23%), including some
narrow bladelets, the majority of medium size between
10 m and 13 mm and a single large one (around 18 mm).
Few platforms are known.
Micro-bladelets from pink imported flint are present
(ca. 9%) as well as wider ones. Kombewa surfaces attest
that the cores were shaped from flakes. Platforms are
flat or prepared, sometimes abraded. Central blades are
lacking, unlike lateral ones, which are dominant.
Cobble paved building sub-phase pressure techniques
are very similar to the Channelled building sub-phase’s
and one wonders if the lack of micro-bladelets could be
due to the intensity and precision of sewing activity.
Cell building sub-phase samples from Building CF
and Courtyard 20M-2 (second part of the 8th millennium cal. BC?) provided a large set of 231 blade(-let)s.
The latter include 34 bidirectional items and 110 prismatic pressure blade(let)s; the rest includes undetermined
or unidirectional percussion items. With 48% pressure,
evidence increases compared to the previous stages.
The proportion of obsidian increases simultaneously
(75% of the pressure production). The in situ production of obsidian bladelets is demonstrated by the
presence of pre-cores shaped from large flakes (fig. 3),
some shaping flakes and opening platforms or crests,
1 2 3 3 2 1 2 1 2'
Fig. 2. Patterns of pressure central blades.Didier Binder
238
from the Building DS deposit previously discussed during the Nig ̆de PPN4 conference
(Binder, submitted), as well as exhausted cores.
3 of the 4 pressure cores have a very oblique
flat platform inclined towards the core back.
The fourth shows two alternate series, correlated to the presence of 2 unidirectional bladelets
and one bidirectional narrow bladelet, corresponding to repairs from an opposite secondary
platform (fig. 4).
Obsidian platforms are rarely prepared or
concave and are, most of the time, punctiform
and abraded or flat. Some of the flat platforms
are extremely inclined towards the dorsal face.
Narrow bladelets (less than 8.5 mm width)
are present (n=11), but decrease compared to
the middle size (8.5 mm-13 mm) (n=48.75%).
Large ones (more than 13 mm width) are still
very few (n=4).
Flint pressure bladelets are few (n=22) and
cover the same width range as obsidian (3 microbladelets, 16 medium range, 3 wide ones).
Flint varieties seem to enlarge still, including
buff and pink, but also brown translucent flint
(n=7). The novelty is the probable presence of
heat treatment of pinkish flint. This observation
has been made for 4 prismatic medium bladelets, 2 undetermined bladelets and 4 thin flakes.
Without experiments it is difficult to evaluate
the intensity of this treatment, which is not easy
to observe with the naked eye. Buff flint also
provides 2 cores: one was clearly exploited by
pressure with a very oblique platform and axial
posterior crest; the other with a very oblique
platform and a cortical side, could have been
started by pressure and then transformed by
percussion. Pinkish flint also provides a core
with an oblique platform and a bifacial shaping out with anterior and posterior crests, very
similar to obsidian cores.
Obsidian work during these phases could
be quite similar to Cafer höyük where obsidian pressure technique was studied by S.
Calley (1985). It appears within the early phase
(8250-7850 cal. BC) and seems to continue
during the whole MPPNB. The “chaîne opératoire” is well described: a bifacial shaping
preserving a flat, and often oblique, pressure
platform. Sometimes the cores are shaped out
from flakes. The range of the pressure bladelet
0 5 cm Fig. 3. Pre-core shaped from a thick and large obsidian
flake; Cell building sub-phase (MPPNB).PPN Pressure Technology: Views from Anatolia
239
width is comprised between 8 mm and 14 mm. Calley,
referring to Redman’s study (1982), underlined the
links between Cafer and Cayönü pressure techniques.
LPPNB
A Large Room building sub-phase sample from
Building BF, at the transition between the 8th and the
7 th millenium (LPPNB) includes 190 items. It provided
65 pressure blade(-let)s and only 19 percussion blades
including 5 bidirectional items.
Flint pressure bladelets are rare; their width are situated within a 7 mm-12.5 mm range. A single piece provides evidence of a heat treatment.
Obsidian proportion increases again. Visible platforms are punctiform on an abraded surface, flat oblique or concave. The 49 bladelets width range is between
7 mm and 16 mm with only 8 items larger than 13 mm
and only 3 between 7 mm and 8.5 mm. Width standardization increases clearly as well as the regularity of
the débitage rhythms, as indicated by the ratio of 212’
sequences (3/4 of the observable patterns). There were
no cores in the sample studied but the inclinations
observed on some platforms are consistent with the core
shapes from the Cell building sub-phase.
Most of the pressure techniques in use during the
Channelled building sub-phase till the Large Room building sub-phase could be easily done with light devices.
The trends given by measurements show a gradual
increase in width and a decrease in thickness, visible
within the Large Room buildings, and may be compared
to Sabi Abyad II items discussed by Astruc and Pelegrin
(this volume).
Among the obsidian pressure sample, one item
appears totally different from the others. It is a “Cayönü
tool” from a wide blade (proximal width close to
20 mm), quite long despite it’s having been broken in
the distal part (over 12 cm) (Caneva, Conti et al., 1994,
p. 257, fig. 4, 12). This one suggests a different immobilization and pressure system, at least a crutch to be used
standing up. During the late PPN phases in Cayönü, the
existence of much more complex pressure devices is
reinforced by the presence, of a very wide (32 mm) and
long (over than 16 cm) fragment of a prismatic pressure
blade from the Cell building sub-phase (sample S3-1/4)
(fig. 5). The latter could indicate, following Pelegrin’s
experiments and papers (Pelegrin, 1996, 2003), that
a lever system was in use. These very preliminary data
let us wonder about the knapping techniques that were
used for some of the widest blades from Cell building
DS, which are unfortunately still not characterized
because of the melting and for some unidirectional blades transformed into Cayönü tools as well.
Central anatolia
On the slopes of the Göllü dagˇ volcano, two different
obsidian workshops, Kayırlı-Bitlikeler and KömürcüKaletepe, have given evidence of pressure production.
The latter provides many data related to the production
of prismatic bladelets associated with a highly specialized naviform industry (Binder, Balkan-Atlı, 2001).
At Kaletepe, locus P, layer 3.2, the pressure bladelet
production was obtained from bifacial pre-cores with an
oblique flat platform (fig. 6). The series of 5 items (two
lateral blades rejected as wastes, 3 central blades kept for
diffusion if not broken and longer than 70 mm) were
very recurrent and standardized with a careful abrasion
of point in contact with the crutch. Cores were rejected
when the blades no longer attained 70 mm in lenght,
and in these conditions no micro-bladelets were intentionally produced.
The range of the most regular central blades width
(design 212’), perfectly unimodal, was mainly (69%)
0 5 cm
Fig. 4. Exhausted obsidian cores; Cell building sub-phase (MPPNB).Didier Binder
240
between 1.04 and 1.48 cm; with 16% under 1.04 and 15%
over 1.48 cm. This range fits perfectly, as J. Pelegrin’s
experiments demonstrated, to a sitting position.
During PPNB times, and especially EPPNB, obsidian
from the Göllü dagˇ workshops had been diffused as prismatic bladelets within Cyprus and the Levant.
On one hand the radiocarbon dates obtained
directly from the Kaletepe workshop situate this production between 8300 and 8200 cal. BC, at the transition
E-MPPNB.
On the other hand indirect evidences leads us to suggest that these workshops were active earlier, during the
EPPNB and maybe during the PPNA-PPNB transition.
Imported materials from Göllü dagˇ workshops have
been characterized for example in Shillourokambos,
phase ancienne A, with one early date between 8650 and
8450 cal. BC (Briois, Gratuze et al., 1997); in Dja’de III,
EPPNB with several dates between 8450 and 8250 cal. BC
(Coqueugniot, 2000); in Mureybet IV probably between
8550 and 8250 cal. BC (Cauvin, 1998).
general trendS for anatolian PreSSure
débitageS
Considering the radiocarbon data available today,
the first evidence of pressure could be more or less
contemporaneous in Eastern and Central Anatolia, in
the second half of the 9 th millennium cal. BC (Cayonü
– Channelled building sub-phase; Göllü dagˇ workshops’
exports towards the Levant).
During this early stage, these regions show marked
differences in pressure blade technology: on one hand,
“Çayönü – Channelled building methods” linked to Eastern
Mesopotamian, Caucasian and/or Central Asian bulletcore tradition; on the other hand, “Göllü dagˇ methods”, a
frontal débitage using an oblique flat pressure platform.
Except for the lack of heat-treatment, the “Çayönü –
Channelled building methods” seem to be very close to the
Eastern Mesopotamian or Caucasian bullet-core tradition
from the 10th and early 9th millennia cal. BC. They are
used for flint and obsidian as well. They produce conical
0
5 cm
Fig. 5. Medial fragment of a long obsidian pressure blade;
lever technique; Large Room building sub-phase (LPPNB).
0 5 cm
Fig. 6. Obsidian core and its refitted platform
removal; Kaletepe, workshop P (EPPNB).PPN Pressure Technology: Views from Anatolia
241
or semi-conical cores with normal prepared platforms.
Sharp triangular central bladelets with a broad variety of
patterns are produced within overlapping short series.
Bladelet width shows a bimodal distribution, including
micro-bladelets knapped in the hand, and medium ones
that need a sitting position.
It probably appeared in Eastern Anatolia during the
Channelled building sub-phase in Cayönü between 8550
and 8250 cal. BC after the end of the Grill building subphase. It seems to disappear in Eastern Anatolia within the
end of the Cobble paved building sub-phase (if this subphase really exists!) in the Early 8th millennium cal. BC.
The “Göllü dagˇ methods” show very superficial similarities with Yubetsu, considering the bifacial pre-cores, but
they are in fact completely different considering the size
of the products. They use mainly obsidian, but the same
shapes can be made from flint (Çayönü). It produces
back crested cores with a flat oblique pressure platform.
The frontal débitage, swiping the débitage front from
one edge to the other and again, with recurrent series of
5 items, produced much more regular prismatic blades
with a preferential 212’ pattern.
The débitage surface, more or less triangular during
the early stages (Kaletepe, Cafer inf), seems to be much
more quadrangular later (Cayönü Cell building subphase). This trend supposes the increasing production
of parallel sided bladelets and the rarefication of triangular shapes. Bladelet production uses to be unimodal with
variable means between 9.5 mm and 12.2 mm width,
needing a sitting position.
It appeared in Central Anatolia maybe before 8450 cal.
BC, as indicated by exported Göllü dagˇ items, and certainly
around 8250 cal. BC, considering Kaletepe P dates.
It could appear later in Eastern Anatolia: after 8250
cal. BC in the Early Cafer Höyük settlement, even later
in Cayönu during the Cell building sub-phase. Some
compatible elements attributed to the Cobble paved
building sub-phase, more or less contemporary with
Early Cafer, have to be checked.
It seems very interesting to notice that the trends observed in Eastern Anatolia during the PPN are very similar
to those observed in the Middle and late Neolithic of
south-eastern France, more than 4 millennia later: pressure bladelet débitage on heated pre-cores appearing
around 4100 cal. BC, the same trend between 4100 and
3500 cal. BC leading from conical to quadrangular “flat”
débitage surfaces with extremely (critically) inclined
platforms; and finally lever pressure appearing around
3500 or 3200 cal. BC for very big prismatic blades.
As these traditions are, of course, not directly related
to one another, that could mean that pressure techniques and methods, once mastered, should have independently followed specific trends in order to increase, on
one hand, the regularity and flatness of the blanks and,
on the other hand, their size.
In other terms, we should say that craftsmen, in
Cayonu or elsewhere, were able to take the best part of
these methods and techniques and go as far as possible
in specific mechanisms of pressure.
As far as we know, the pressure styles changed quite
slowly within Eastern and Central Asia between the first
Upper Palaeolithic evidence from around 24 kY, and
Nemrik 9.
Eastern Anatolia looks like the place where pressure
evolution skills were processed, “from the smallest to the
biggest”, during a single millennium.
Around 8200 cal. BC new methods probably related
to those in Göllü dagˇ’s, appeared in Eastern Anatolia
(Cafer höyük) and developped within the “Late PPNB”
(Cayönü – Cell building and Large Room building
sub-phases).
During the Middle and Late PPNB period, the
collapse of the specialized workshops in Cappadocia,
and decreasing of their diffusion towards the Levant,
is probably due to the fact that obsidian sources were
then under the control of the As ̧ıklı-Musular Culture,
which seems to be little concerned by any specialized
lithic production or long distance diffusion, and which
did not use pressure techniques at all for the blade production (Binder, 2002; 2005).
During the same period of time, in Eastern Anatolia,
the use of pressure techniques increases as do the skills
involved in blade production. This region could not
only appear as a centre of exchange networks but also as
a pole of innovation for pressure technology.
The comeback of pressure débitage and related skills
in Central Anatolia, with conical cores and a great abundance of prismatic blades, seems to fit with a renewal
of technical systems within the Pottery Neolithic (Çatal
höyük VIA, around 6500-6250 cal. BC) as suggested by
Conolly (1999).
Eastwards, in Cayonu and related settlements, it
seems that renewal of pressure processes did not stop in
the Middle and Late PPNB, nor in the PNA as well.
We suggest that the pressure comeback in Central
Anatolia could be the consequence of a reactivation of
networks towards the West and presages the diffusion of
pressure techniques throughout western Anatolia and
Europe.
Acknowledgments
This study was carried within the “Mission de Préhis-
toire anatolienne” (ministère des Affaires étrangères
et européennes, direction générale de la Coopération
internationale et du Développement), thanks to the
collaboration of the Department of Prehistory of the
University of Istanbul. Drawings and photographs are
by D. Binder, B. Bireaud and M. Grenet (Mission de préhistoire anatolienne). Many thanks to Kaletepe team,
Ç. Altınbilek and P. C. Anderson for their help.Didier Binder
242
ABBès f., Bellot-Gurlet l., Bressy c., cAuvin M.-c. GrAtuze
B., poupeAu G., 2001.– Nouvelles recherches sur l’obsidienne de Cheikh Hassan (Vallée de l’Euphrate, Syrie) au
Néolithique : PPNA et PPNB ancien, Syria, 78, p. 5-17.
BAlkAn-Atli n., 1994.– La néolithisation de l’Anatolie, vol. 7.
Varia Anatolica, Istanbul, De Boccard.
Binder D., 1984.– Systèmes de débitage laminaire par pression :
exemples chasséens provençaux, in : Tixier J., Inizan M.-L.,
Roche H. (éd.), Préhistoire de la pierre taillée, 2 : Économie
du débitage laminaire : Technologie et expérimentation,
Paris, CREP, p. 71-84.
Binder D., 2002.– Stones making sense: what obsidian could
tell about the origins of the Central Anatolian Neolithic,
in: Gérard F., Thissen L. (eds), The Neolithic of Central
Anatolia. Internal developments and external relations
during the 9th-6th millenia cal. BC, Proceedings of the
International Canew Table Ronde, Istanbul, 23-24
novembre 2001, Yayinlari, Istanbul, p. 79-90.
Binder D., 2005.– Autour de l’obsidienne : un aspect des processus
d’interaction entre agro-pasteurs et chasseurs-cueilleurs
en Anatolie centrale, in : Guilaine J. (éd.), Populations,
économies et environnements, du Néolithique et de
l’Âge du Bronze, Séminaires du Collège de France, Paris,
Errance, p. 117-134.
Binder D., submitted.– Technologie lithique et comportement
social dans le PPN de Çayönü tepesi : un aperçu à travers
l’analyse des matières premières, Paléorient.
Binder d., BAlkAn-Atli N., 2001.– Obsidian exploitation and
blade technology at Kömürcü-Kaletepe (Cappadocia,
Turkey), in: Caneva I., Lemorini C., Zampetti D., Biagi P.
(eds), Beyond Tools. Redefining the PPN Lithic Assemblages
of the Levant, SENEPSE, 9, Berlin, ex oriente, p. 1-16.
BrAidWood l. s., B rAidWood R. J. (eds), 1982.– Prehistoric
village Archaeology in South-Eastern Turkey, Oxford,
British Archaeological Reports.
Briois f., GrAtuze B., GuilAine J., 1997.– Obsidiennes du site
néolithique précéramique de Shillourokambos (Chypre),
Paléorient, 23, 1, p. 95-112.
Brunet F., 2002.– Asie centrale : vers une redéfinition des
complexes culturels de la fin du Pléistocène et des débuts
de l’Holocène, Paléorient, 28, p. 9-24.
cAlley S., 1985.– Le nucléus en obsidienne du Néolithique
de Cafer Höyük (Turquie). Étude préliminaire sur les
techniques de taille, Cahier de l’Euphrate, 4, p. 87-107.
cAnevA I., conti A.-M., leMorini C., zAMpetti D., 1994.– The
Lithic Production at Çayönü: a Preliminary Overview of
the Aceramic Sequence, in: Gebel H. G. K., Kozłowski S.
K. (eds), Neolithic Chipped Lithic Industries of the Fertile
Crescent, Proceedings of the First Workshop on PPN
Chipped Lithic Industries, SENEPSE, 1, Berlin, ex oriente,
p. 253-266.
cAnevA I., leMorini C., zAMpetti D., 1996.– Lithic technology
and functionality through time and space at Çayönü, in:
Kozłowski S. K., Gebel H. G. K. (eds), Neolithic Chipped
Stone Industries of the Fertile Crescent, and Their
Contemporaries in Adjacent Regions, SENEPSE, 3, Berlin,
ex oriente, p. 385-402.
cAnevA I., leMorini C. zAMpetti D., 1998.– Chipped Stones
at Aceramic Çayönü: Technology, Activities, Traditions,
Innovations, in: Arsebük G., Mellink M. J., Schirmer W.
(eds), Light on top of the black hill, studies presented to
Halet Çambel, Istanbul, Ege Yarinlar, p. 199-206.
cAuvin M.-C., 1991.– L’obsidienne au Levant préhistorique :
provenance et fonction, Cahiers de l’Eurphrate, 5-6,
p. 163-190.
cAuvin M.-C., 1998.– L’obsidienne : données récentes
provenant de sites d’habitats néolithiques, in: Cauvin
M.-C., Gourgaud A., Gratuze B., Arnaud N., Poupeau
G., Poidevin J.-L., Chataigner C. (éd.), L’obsidienne
au Proche- et Moyen-Orient: du volcan à l’outil,
Oxford, Archaeopress, BAR International Series, 738,
p. 259-272.
conolly J., 1999.– The Çatalhöyük flint and obsidian industry, Technology and Typology in context, Oxford,
Archaeopress, BAR International Series, 787.
coqueuGniot É., 2000.– Dja’de (Syrie), un village à la veille de
la domestication (seconde moitié du 9e millénaire av.
J.-C.), in: Guilaine J. (éd.), Premiers paysans du monde.
Naissance des agricultures, Paris, Errance, (Séminaire du
Collège de France), p. 63-79.
inizAn M.-L., 1988.– Technologie lithique : le débitage par
pression en Orient. Perspectives de recherche, in: L’Asie
centrale et ses rapports avec les civilisations orientales
des origines à l’Âge du Fer, Paris, CNRS, p. 53-58.
inizAn M.-L., lechevAllier M., pluMet P., 1990.– Le débitage
laminaire par pression, marqueur technologique du
peuplement de l’Amérique du Nord. Son origine au
Paléolithique de l’Asie septentrionale et sa diffusion,
Colloque international, Novosibirsk.
inizAn M.-L., tixier J., 2001.– L’émergence des arts du feu : le
traitement thermique des roches siliceuses, Paléorient,
26, 2, p. 23-36.
kozłoWski S. K., 2002.– Nemrik, an aceramic village in
Northern Iraq. Warsaw, Institute of Archaeology, Warsaw
University.
Moore A. M. t., 2000.– The settlement of Abu Hureira 1: stone
and other artifacts, in: Moore A. M. T., Hillman G., Legge
A. J., Village on the Euphrates. From foraging to farming
in Abu Hureyra, Oxford, University Press, p. 165-188.
Moore A. M. t., hillMAn G. et al., 1975.– The excavation of Tell
Abu Hureyra in Syria: a preliminary report, Proceedings of
the prehistoric society, 41, p. 50-77.
BibliographyPPN Pressure Technology: Views from Anatolia
243
ÖzdoGˇ An A., 1999.– Çayönü, in: Özdogˇ an M., Basgelen N.
(eds), Neolithic archaeology in Turkey. The cradle of
civilization. New discoveries, Istanbul, Arkeoloji ve Sanat
Yayinlari, 1, p. 35-64.
ÖzdoGˇ An M., BAlkAn-Atli N., 1994.– South-East Anatolian
chipped stone sequence (Approach for a synthesis), in:
Gebel H. G. K., Kozłowski S. K. (eds), Neolithic Chipped
Lithic Industries of the Fertile Crescent, Proceedings of
the First Workshop on PPN Chipped Lithic Industries,
SENEPSE, 1, Berlin, ex oriente, p. 205-206.
peleGrin j., 1988.– Débitage expérimental par pression : du
plus petit au plus grand, in : J. Tixier, Technologie pré-
historique, Paris, CNRS, p. 37-53.
peleGrin j., 1994.– Lithic technology in Harappan times, in:
Parpolla A., Koskikallio P., South asian archaeology,
1993, Helsinki, 2, p. 585-598.
peleGrin j., 1996.– Débitage au Chalcolithique de grandes lames
de silex par pression au levier, in: La science au présent,
Paris, Encyclopaedia Universalis, 17 p.
peleGrin j., 2003.– Blade-Making Techniques from the Old World.
Insights and Applications to Mesoamerican Obsidian
Lithic Technology, in: Hirth K. G. (ed.), Mesoamerican
lithic technology. Expérimentation and Interpretation,
Utah University Press, p. 55-71.
redMAn C. L., 1982.– The Cayönü chipped stone industry : the
1968 and 1970 excavations seasons, in: Braidwod L. S.,
Braidwood R. J. (eds), Prehistoric village Archaeology
in South-Eastern Turkey, Oxford, British Archaeological
Reports, 138, p. 17-71.
tixier j., 1976.– L’industrie lithique capsienne de l’Aïn Dokkara,
région de Tebessa, Algérie, Libyca, 24, p. 21-54.
tixier j., inizAn M.-l., roche h. (éd.), 1984.– Préhistoire de
la pierre taillée, 2 : Économie du débitage laminaire :
Technologie et expérimentation, Paris, CREP.
W ilke P., 1996.– Bullet-shaped microblade cores of the Near
Eastern Neolithic: experimental replicative studies, in:
Kozłowski S. K., Gebel H. G. K. (eds), Neolithic Chipped
Stone Industries of the Fertile Crescent, and Their
Contemporaries in Adjacent Regions, SENEPSE, 3, Berlin,
ex oriente, p. 289-310.
View publication statsView publication stats