Towards a Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian
Exchange in the Neolithic Near East
David Ortega & Juan José Ibañez & Lamya Khalidi & Vicenç Méndez &
Daniel Campos & Luís Teira
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013
Abstract This paper examines an alternative approach to previously proposed models
of prehistoric exchange such as the law of monotonic decrement or the down-the-line
exchange model developed by Renfrew (Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 34:
319–331, 1968, Renfrew 1977) to explain the distribution of obsidian across the Near
East during the Neolithic period. Renfrew’s down-the-line model, which results in a
very regular and clustered network, does not permit the circulation of obsidian to
regions of the Near East that are further than 300 km from the source zones, as is shown
in the archaeological data available. Obsidian exchange is a complex system where
multiple factors interact and evolve in time and space. We therefore explore AgentBased Modelling (ABM) so as to get a better understanding of complex networks.
ABM simulations of an exchange network where some agents (villages) are allowed to
attain long-distance exchange partners through correlated random walks are carried out.
These simulations show what variables (population density, degree of collaboration
between villages...) are relevant for the transfer of obsidian over long distances.
Moreover, they show that a type of small-world exchange network could explain the
breadth of obsidian distribution (up to 800 km from source) during the Near Eastern
Neolithic.
J Archaeol Method Theory
DOI 10.1007/s10816-013-9196-1
D. Ortega : J. J. Ibañez (*)
Institución Milá y Fontanals, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Egipcíaques, 15,
08001 Barcelona, Spain
e-mail: ibanezjj@imf.csic.es
L. Khalidi
UMR 5133—CNRS—Archéorient, Maison de l’Orient et de la Méditerranée, 7 rue Raulin, 69007 Lyon,
France
V. Méndez : D. Campos
Grup de Física Estadística, Departament de Física, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193Bellaterra,
Cerdanyola, Spain
L. Teira
Instituto Internacional de Investigaciones Prehistóricas de Cantabria, Universidad de Cantabria, Edificio
Interfacultativo, Avda. de los Castros, s/n, 39005 Santander, SpainKeywords Agent-based modelling . Down-the-line model . Obsidian exchange . Smallworld networks . Neolithic . Near East
Introduction
In economic terms, the transition from hunter–gatherer to farming societies in the Near
East is characterised by the beginnings of agriculture and animal husbandry. Following
the process of sedentarization, the important shift towards a settled agro-pastoral
lifestyle was accompanied by other socio-economic and ideological changes, such as
the first villages, cultic buildings, and long-distance exchange in exogenous resources.
It is likely that all of these cultural shifts were interrelated, forming a complex and
dynamic cultural system that was continually changing.
Archaeologists have sought to explain the origin of the Neolithic as a process linked
to environmental adaptation (Bar Yosef and Meadow 1995), growing socio-economic
complexity (Kuijt and Goring-Morris 2002) or as a revolution of symbols (Cauvin
2000). However, the emergence of long-distance trade in resources has played a
minimal role in debates on the process of neolithisation and its socio-economic
consequences, despite the fact that intensified inter-regional interaction was likely to
have had a part in enabling the transition to farming societies.
It has become increasingly evident that cultural interaction between distant regions
of the Fertile Crescent can be crucial to explaining the transition into the Neolithic (Bar
Yosef and Belfer-Cohen 1989; Watkins 2008). The exchange of items is present in all
human societies. Exchange is primarily an economic behaviour that is intended to
assure the supply of needed or valued commodities not accessible or produced by the
groups being supplied. However, exchange is also a way of establishing and maintaining social relationships, whereby exchange networks can also be avenues for social
exchange (experiences, values, beliefs. etc.) or tools of political relations. Therefore, the
study of exchange dynamics is also an analysis of social interaction between
communities.
This paper proposes new approaches to modelling the complex workings of past
human exchange networks so as to better understand their characteristics. Using AgentBased Modelling and Complex Network theory (Barrat et al. 2008), we take a step
beyond Renfrew’s seminal models to explore the complexity of the exchange networks
that were inextricably linked to the spread of agriculture and animal husbandry in the
Fertile Crescent. We test the importance of a number of variables, in order to begin
reconstructing the mechanisms of exchange between Neolithic villages in the Near
East.
Obsidian Circulation in the Neolithic
Obsidian is a volcanic glass that was widely used in prehistory for the making of
utilitarian tools and elite objects. Though it forms in few volcanic areas and in varying
quantities and qualities, the properties of obsidian from different outcrops can be
precisely geochemically distinguished so that the geochemical properties of a tool
found on a site can be matched to an exact source origin (Gratuze 1998, 1999).
Obsidian is therefore an excellent tool for tracking prehistoric exchange.
Ortega et al.Many scholars have worked on the question of obsidian distribution in the Near East
(Barge and Chataigner 2003; Cauvin et al. 1998; Cauvin 2002; Carter et al. 2011). The
sources of obsidian in Cappadocia, eastern Anatolia and the Caucasus are well
characterised and the spread of obsidian from these sources to the Fertile Crescent is
extensively documented. However, most models used to explain the mechanisms of
obsidian exchange continue to be based on the down-the-line model proposed by
Renfrew in the 1960s. Since the 1960s, few viable alternatives for modelling obsidian
exchange in the ancient Near East have been presented, severely limiting our capacity
to understand the phenomenon of prehistoric exchange and its role in the origins of the
Neolithic.
In this paper, we evaluate the down-the-line model, pointing out some of its
weaknesses. This model does not explain the appearance of obsidian at long distances
from sources of origin and does not take into account certain important variables that
affected the distribution of this commodity. We therefore explore multi-agent modelling
which allows us to approach the topic of obsidian exchange as a complex system
composed of autonomous, interacting agents (in this case Neolithic communities). As
an alternative, we propose a type of small-world network in which agents from some
villages are able to move (with goods) longer distances to reach new exchange partners
than is possible in Renfrew’s model, so as to better replicate the archaeological data.
Finally, we present the first results of the multi-agent simulation. In addition to
discussing the critical variables for simulating long-distance transfer of obsidian, we
illustrate the tremendous potential of small-world exchange networks for explaining
obsidian distribution in the Near East.
Our geographical focus constitutes the western wing of the Fertile Crescent and
includes the northern, central and southern Levant, northern Mesopotamia, and central
Anatolia. Chronologically, we focus on the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B period (8300–
7000 cal. BC) (Aurenche et al. 1987, 2001), during which time obsidian exchange
networks appear to have been well established in the Near East (Fig. 1).
Discussing Renfrew’s Model: the Law of Monotonic Decrement
and Down-the-Line Exchange
Renfrew’s Model
The Law of Monotonic Decrement and the down-the-line exchange model, which were
proposed by Renfrew, were modelled empirically on the archaeological data that was
available at the end of the 1960s. In Renfrew’s 1968 article, the author observed that
there was a linear diminution in the quantity of obsidian with distance from the source
of origin. Renfrew called this the Law of Monotonic Decrement. By plotting the
proportion of obsidian to flint against the distance to the obsidian source of origin on
a logarithmic scale, an exponential fall-off curve appeared (Renfrew et al. 1968;
Renfrew 1975). Renfrew first explained the fall-off in frequency with distance as a
reflection of what the energy spent implied in transport. However, Renfrew later
emphasized that the number of transactions made was the crucial parameter responsible
for the decay, as local communities consumed one part of the obsidian received,
transferring the other part to other communities (Renfrew 1975, p. 78).
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangeWhen contrasting this model with the archaeological data, Renfrew distinguished a
first zone near the obsidian sources (the supply zone) where the quantity of obsidian
was high and decreased slowly. Obsidian represented more than 80 % of the lithic
materials present on sites in this zone. This was interpreted as an area where communities were supplied directly from the obsidian outcrops. Renfrew observed that this
supply zone stretched 250 km from the sources of Cappadocia in central Anatolia
towards the western wing of the Fertile Crescent, and as much as 350 km from eastern
Anatolian sources towards the eastern wing of the Fertile Crescent. Renfrew also
distinguished a very large contact zone, where the exchange of obsidian among
communities resulted in a quick decay in the proportion of obsidian. The author
suggested that this fall-off was due to a model of down-the-line exchange, where one
part of the obsidian available at one site was used for making tools while the other part
was transferred to a neighbouring site.
Fig. 1 Map of the Near East illustrating obsidian sources (white dots) and PPNB archaeological sites with
information on the proportion of obsidian vs. flint tools (black dots). The location of the obsidian sources are
taken from Obsidatabase (Varoutsikos and Chataigner 2012)
Ortega et al.In order to fit this model to the archaeological data, Renfrew specified that sites
would have been 90 km equidistant and that the rate of obsidian consumption/exchange
by communities would have been 50 %.
Critique of the Model
Despite early critics (i.e. Hodder 1974; Earle and Ericson 1977) and inconsistencies
between the model and the archaeological record, which are becoming increasingly
evident as more archaeological data is obtained, the down-the-line model is the one
currently used to explain obsidian distribution in the Near East and it is also commonly
used to explain exchange systems in many other prehistoric contexts (Torrence 1986).
Soon after Renfrew’s proposal, Hodder observed that different systems of exchange
and distribution of commodities produced similar fall-off curves, which he described as
a phenomenon of equifinality (Hodder 1974). While different exchange models can
generate more or less similar fall-off curves, it is very unlikely that they would produce
exactly the same fall-off curve. Mathematical simulation might therefore be a useful
way to delineate the point at which obsidian distribution models are affected by
equifinality in their results.
However, other weaknesses of the down-the-line model are proving to be more
relevant. Analysis of the archaeological data reveals that obsidian exchange was likely
more complex than the simple chain transfer of material from one site to a neighbouring
one. Soon after testing his down-the-line model against the archaeological data,
Renfrew observed that the site of Jericho in Palestine (located at considerable distances
from the source area that supplied it) had consumed larger quantities of obsidian than
was predicted by his model. These sorts of anomalies in the archaeological record,
which present higher quantities of obsidian than predicted by the down-the-line model,
have been observed at a number of sites such as Tell ‘Arqa (Thalmann 2006) or Nahal
Lavan 109 (Burian and Friedman 1988), though no alternative model has been
proposed to explain them.
A model for obsidian exchange should explain the distribution of obsidian in space,
as it spread from its source of origin, rather than its distribution along one dimension
(Ericson 1977). Renfrew argued that the application of the model in two dimensions
would produce similar Gaussian (normal) distributions (Renfrew 1977). However, this
is a question that remains untested.
Diachronic changes in obsidian distribution have been noted by several scholars
working on the Neolithic (tenth to sixth millennium cal. BC) Near East (Cauvin and
Chataigner 1998; Chataigner and Barge 2005) and are emblematic of the major socioeconomic and cultural transformations that occurred during the period of neolithisation.
A temporally static model cannot therefore explain a phenomenon that is dynamic in
nature.
Furthermore, a large number of variables could have affected the nature and routing
of exchange networks during this period. For example, Renfrew’s model assumed only
terrestrial transport of obsidian, excluding maritime and fluvial transport. However,
maritime transport was used during the earliest stages of the Neolithic, as the archaeological data for Cyprus demonstrates. Not only were plant and animal species
transported to Cyprus during the PPNA, but obsidian from Anatolian sources is also
found on early Neolithic Cypriot sites (Briois et al. 1997; Guilaine et al. 2011;
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangePeltenburg 1998). Moreover, the use of animals for transport (i.e. oxen) is probable, at
least from the Middle PPNB (eighth millennium BC) onward (Helmer et al. 2005). In
sum, transport systems are likely to be relevant variables when trying to understand
past exchange systems (Hodder and Orton 1976; Torrence 1986: p. 122–123; Sidrys
1977: p. 103–105; Ammerman 1979; Ammerman et al. 1978; Wright 1970).
Another relevant variable for modelling obsidian exchange is population density
(Ericson 1977). In structuring his model, Renfrew assumed that population density was
homogeneous. However, many decades of survey and excavation in the Near East have
successfully demonstrated that population density was quite variable, and depended in
part on ecological and geographical factors which may have changed in different
periods of the neolithisation process. Certain areas were more ideal for settlement
and were therefore more densely populated such as the Middle Euphrates, the Jordan
valley and the marshy areas in the steppic north–south belt (Kiujt 2000; Goring-Morris
and Belfer-Cohen 2011).
Finally, Refrew’s model assumed that all villages were prepared to exchange. As
Hodder points out, models of exchange would benefit from Sahlins’ (1974) generalized, balanced, and negative reciprocities, while at the same time allowing for the
existence of conflicts, tricking strategies and rule manipulations (Hodder 1982, p. 200).
Exploring Renfrew’s Mathematical Function
By expressing Renfrew’s model as a mathematical function and by changing several
parameters, we can calculate how it behaves. The model can be summed up with the
following equation:
c0 1−αð Þn−1
The equation represents the amount of obsidian that reaches the nth node of the
network, whereby co is the total volume of a commodity, α the rate of consumption and
n=1,2,... the order of the node. The ratio of consumption is the part of the commodity
that is detracted from circulation in every node of the network. This equation can also
be written as:
c0
1−αe nln 1−αð Þ
which results in the exponential function proposed by Renfrew. Consumption in every
node is calculated as follows:
c0α 1−αð Þn−1
In using a fixed ratio of consumption, the quantity of obsidian available for
exchange declines drastically after very few exchange events (Fig. 2). This is especially
true for high rates of consumption (0.9), but it is also the case for lower consumption
rates. Following the down-the-line model, only very low consumption/exchange ratios
(10 % consumption and 90 % exchange) would have allowed obsidian to arrive to the
southern Levant in the quantities observed in the archaeological record (representing
around 0.5 % obsidian in the lithic assemblages). However, it is not reasonable to
Ortega et al.significantly reduce the consumption to exchange ratio in each node, because it is
unlikely that early Neolithic societies systematically exchanged nine times more than
they consumed of a valued resource.
Renfrew tried to resolve the fact that his model did not fully conform to the
archaeological data by establishing long distances between places (90 km), that is, by
reducing the number of events of consumption/exchange. However, the proposed
distance between nodes does not replicate the archaeological record as the density of
Neolithic sites in the Near East was higher and the distances between sites much
smaller in certain areas. For example, the distance between the contemporary PPNA
period sites of Tell ‘Abr and Dja’de which are located along the Middle Euphrates is
only 10 km.
As the down-the-line model does not adequately explain the distribution of this
commodity across the Near East and as some relevant variables are not considered in
Renfrew’s model, a new type of approach—agent-based modelling—and a new model
of obsidian exchange that functions through small-world networks of exchange, are
needed to cope with these questions.
Agent-Based Modelling
Agent-Based Modelling (ABM) and simulation intends to artificially build systems
composed of autonomous, interacting agents. This approach is especially useful for
understanding the dynamics of complex systems, where multiple variables interact and
evolve in time and space. By modelling systems involving agents and their interactions,
self-organized patterns often emerge, which are not explicitly programmed into the
models but arise through agent interactions. ABM has been used in many different
fields of research and its use in the social sciences (Axelrod 1997; Epstein and Axtell
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Resource units transfer
Exchange events
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1
Fig. 2 Fall-off curve of quantity of obsidian in relation to number of exchange events, using fixed
consumption/exchange ratios, as proposed in Renfrew’s down-the-line model, for an initial volume of the
commodity equalling 1,000 units of obsidian
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian Exchange1996) and in archaeology is gaining momentum (Axtell et al. 2002; Brantingham 2006;
Dean et al. 2000; Kohler and Gumerman 2000; Evans et al. 2009).
The distribution of obsidian in the Neolithic Near East can be described as the result
of the interactions (exchange) of autonomous agents (Neolithic villages), who generated and used a complex network of obsidian distribution that evolved with time.
In a first instance, ABM will allow us to test the down-the-line model in a bidimensional scale. Due to the problem of the critical decrease in the quantity of
obsidian intended for exchange in every consumption/exchange event, we are aware
that regular networks issued from a down-the-line model will not supply obsidian to
distant areas. We therefore test alternative models of obsidian exchange in which local
exchange networks are complemented with the presence of villages that can benefit
from an access to obsidian at a distance (small-world networks). We also test whether
or not the application of a first set of variables to these models succeeds in moving
obsidian over long distances. These variables include the proportion of villages which
are allowed to access exchange partners at a distance, population density (number of
villages per unit of surface), degree of collaboration between villages (degree of
acceptance of exchanges), distance from which the villages can get direct access to
obsidian sources and the ratio of consumption/exchange of obsidian. In this paper, we
concentrate on reproducing obsidian distribution during the PPNB (Fig. 1 and Table 1).
In order to do so, archaeological data pertaining to the proportion of obsidian versus
flint in the lithic assemblages of PPNB sites was gathered from published literature, and
inputted into a database specifically designed for this study (Table 1). Sites in Cyprus
are not included here because only the terrestrial transport of obsidian is being
considered in our first simulations. For the purposes of testing these new models, we
assume that there was a similar consumption rate of lithic resources for tool making in
each PPNB village, and use the proportion of obsidian to flint as a direct indicator of
the quantity of obsidian consumed at a specific village.
Finally, the results of the different simulations are compared with the archaeological
data, taking account of the degree of compatibility between the archaeological and
simulated results in both the profile of the fall-off curve, and in the quantity/proportion
of obsidian arriving to the southern Levant. Based on the archaeological data for the
PPNB, an adequate model of obsidian exchange should supply a rate of 0.5 % obsidian
to flint, to villages in the southern Levant.
Small-World Networks as an Alternative to the Down-the-Line Model
Small-world networks (Watts 2004; Watts and Strogatz 1998) are present in a great
variety of natural and social systems. These networks lie midway between regular
networks (Fig. 3a), where most agents are linked with their immediate neighbours, and
random networks, where most agents are linked with distant ones. In small-world
networks (Fig. 3b) neighbouring agents are interconnected, but some of them are also
able to interact with distant agents by establishing shortcuts between the nodes. The
characteristics of networks are defined by path length L(p), the property measuring the
mean separation between two nodes, and the clustering coefficient C(p), measuring the
degree to which agents tend to group together in local neighbourhoods. Regular
networks show a high mean path length, as many nodes must be crossed through to
move from one extremity of the network to the opposite extremity, and a high
Ortega et al.Table 1 A list of PPNB archaeological sites used for comparison to the simulation, including information on
the proportion of obsidian vs. flint tools (found in publications) and on the distance to the nearest obsidian
source
Id Site Level/loci Km Flint Obsidian Percent Reference
1 Kayırlı-Bitlikeler 0 0 100 100.00 Balkan-Atli et al. 2001, p. 38
2 Kömürcü-Kaletepe c. 4 0 0 828 100.00 Balkan-Atli et al. 1999,
Table 1
3 Aşıklı Höyük 30 5 22,000 99.98 Esin et al. 1991, p. 145
4 Musular 30 20 5,000 99.60 Özbasaran 1999, p. 152
5 Hacıbeyli Höyük 60 1 121 99.18 Fujii 1995, Table 1
6 Boytepe 100 51 848 94.33 Balkan, 1989, Table 1
7 Can Hasan III 150 1,823 69,497 97.44 Ataman 1988, Fig. 15
8 Çatal Höyük Pre-XII A–D 160 676 12,161 94.73 Carter et al. 2005, Table 11.1
9 Cafer Höyük I–IV 160 10 90 90.00 Cauvin 1989, p. 80
10 Süberde II–III 250 2,993 26,937 90.00 Bordaz 1966, p. 32
11 Tell Sabi Abyad II ph. 2-1 310 480 657 57.78 Copeland 1989, Table 3.3
12 Tell Damishiliyya I st 1-2 310 248 20 7.46 Nishiaki 2000, Table 5.1
13 Mezraa Teleilat ph IV 340 1,551 151 8.87 Coskunsu 2007, Table V.1
and VII-3
14 Tell Ain el-Kerkh c 3–6 370 9,710 1654 14.55 Arimura 2007, Table 3.147
15 Tell Halula 2A–2C 380 2,754 468 14.53 Molist et al. 2001, Table 1
16 Tell Mureybet ph. IVB 400 2,165 90 3.99 Cauvin 2004, p. 325
17 Cheikh Hassan 400 5,000 35 0.70 Abbes et al. 2001, p. 13
18 Ras Shamra Vc 410 19,579 593 2.94 Contenson 1992
19 Ghoraife I–II 620 24,322 136 0.56 Contenson 1995
20 Ramad I–II 640 16,422 149 0.90 Contenson, 2000, Tables 5
and 8
21 Tell Aswad II 640 37,751 254 0.67 Cauvin 1995
22 Beisamoun lev. 1–3 680 4,793 15 0.31 Lechevallier 1978a, p. 153
23 Horvat Galil 690 8,836 33 0.37 Gopher 1997, p. 195, 207
24 Mujahiya 710 8,311 17 0.20 Gopher 1990, p. 120, 132
25 Yiftahel Area C 720 126,925 8 0.01 Yellin 2012, p. 243
26 Munhata 3–6 730 14,076 4 0.03 Gopher 1989
27 Kfar HaHoresh 730 120,170 7 0.01 Goring-Morris et al. 1995,
Tables 1 and 114
28 Jericho 820 17,467 91 0.52 Crowfoot-Payne 1983,
Tables 9–16
29 Motza VI 830 9,152 432 4.51 Khalaily et al. 2007, Table 2
30 Abu Gosh 830 18,422 8 0.04 Lechevallier 1978b, p. 41
31 Nahal Lavan 109 930 10,944 144 1.30 Burian et al. 1999, Table 1
32 Beidha 980 44,248 3 0.01 Mortensen 1970
Sites in Cyprus are not included because only the terrestrial transport of obsidian is considered in the
simulations presented here
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian Exchangeclustering coefficient, as abundant local connections of nodes results in local clusters.
Random networks show a low mean path length, as extremities of the networks can be
reached crossing through very few links, and a low clustering coefficient, as distant
linking of the nodes results in a scarcity of local clusters. Small-world networks bear
some characteristics of both types of networks as they are highly clustered, because
local links are dominant, while having small characteristic path lengths, as a result of
the distant linking of some of the nodes. This results in a very efficient network, as it
allows for rapid linking between distant zones of the network, while showing a low
proportion of distant links.
Based on a regular network of local interactions with neighbours, which we
associate with the down-the-line model, a new network model can be obtained in
which by a simple iterative algorithm with a probability p, some nodes are randomly
selected to reconnect with other further ones. When in a regular network some
“shortcuts” are created connecting distant parts of the graph, average path length is
dramatically reduced, but clustering (measuring the degree of association in an agent’s
neighbourhood) is substantially preserved (Cassi and Zirulia 2008). These shortcuts are
henceforth referred to as non-local exchange paths, while the links joining
neighbouring agents are referred to as local exchange paths.
Small-world networks have been used by sociologists and economists, among
others, to explore the effect of the network topology on processes of diffusion, and
especially through social networks of technical knowledge (Cassi and Zirulia 2008),
social norms (Santos et al. 2012), innovations (Delre et al. 2010) and prices in
economic trade systems (Wilhite 2001).
Most of these studies resort to the algorithms of Watts and Strogatz (1998), which
create fixed small-world networks, through which agents interact. In our case, we
expect that the small-world network would appear as an emergent property of the
dynamic connectivity in the model. Successive agent searches or explorations of the
Fig. 3 Schematic representation of a a regular network resulting from a down-the-line model and b of a
small-world network with shortcuts. The thick black line indicates the path followed by agents with obsidian
when moving from one extremity of the network to the other, the regular network resulting in a higher path
length (higher number of nodes/cells crossed) than with a small-world network
Ortega et al.territory using correlated random walks (CRW, see below) would lead the communities
to establish increasingly longer connections to distant territories through which supply
of the commodity and exchange would take place. The small-world network model can
allow some villages to obtain obsidian from distant partners, while at the same time,
preserving their local networks of exchange. Shortcuts reduce the number of steps
needed for a resource to arrive in regions at a given distance from its origin. Therefore,
the problem of the drastic fall-off of the resource with every event of exchange would
be partially corrected, as some villages would be allowed to access the commodity in
distant places, outside of their neighbourhood.
Random Walk Search Strategies
A random walk (RW) is the standard method used to model the movement of
autonomous agents who are searching for targets in contexts of partial information or
uncertainty. The villages allowed to carry out a shortcut use a CRW in order to
efficiently search for a target of unknown location. Simple random walks consist of a
series of walks of fixed or varied amplitude with a random choice of the direction taken
at every step.
Several scholars have previously explored the use of simple RW to reproduce the
spatial distribution of archaeological items, including obsidian, around a centre of
production (Hodder 1974; Hodder and Orton 1976; Renfrew 1977). For our purposes,
we use a CRW in which agents start moving from their original cell to one of the eight
neighbouring cells. They decide which cell to visit next by choosing at random among
those cells that allow them to move further away from their starting point. This allows
us to exclude the unrealistic possibility of backward trajectories that would be useless
or inefficient from the point of view of search efficiency.
Obsidian Exchange Multi-Agent Model
We resort to a multi-agent model simulation to test a new exchange model (based on a
small-world network of exchange) in order to correct one of the limitations of
Renfrew’s model: its inability to transfer obsidian over long distances. In this section,
we present the parameters of our first simulations, which are simplified (in comparison
to the archaeological evidence) for the purposes of establishing the effectiveness of the
model and the relevance of a first set of variables.
The Spatial and Chronological Context
The spatial context is established as a flat area, 900 km long (on a north–south axis) and
350 wide (on an east–west axis). Agents are defined as sedentary farming communities
(villages) in sites of equal size and hierarchy. These communities move to search for
obsidian, interacting with other villages that they recognize as partners for exchange.
The space is divided into 15×15 km cells that will host a community each with
probability pc, so that the random spatial distribution of farming communities in each
realization of the model is determined from the beginning and is assumed to remain
unchanged during successive cycles.
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangeThe production and exchange of obsidian takes place in successive cycles, each of
them simulating one annual period. We replicate these cycles up to three thousand
times.
Partner Search Strategies
Villages are able to get partners for exchange in their surrounding region. As a result, a
local network is established in which partners exchange regularly in every chronological cycle with all neighbours present in the immediate vicinity (one cell distance). This
allows us to reproduce the down-the-line model, where villages are joined to a network
of local partners.
Later, in order to test the small-world hypothesis, some villages are allowed (with
probability pt: in each cycle) to travel outside of their local networks of exchange by
journeying and obtaining information on the presence of potential partners or the
presence of obsidian as they move. For this purpose, they use a CRW in which they
start moving from their original cell to one of the eight neighbouring cells (at random in
any direction) and decide which cell to visit next by choosing at random among those
cells that allow them to move further away from their starting point. The length of the
random walks is limited to a number of visited cells nmax.
To reproduce the idea that network exchanges are not solely driven by obsidian but
may pertain to networks that were present well before the introduction of the resource,
we reserve the first five hundred cycles of the simulation for the formation of the preexisting network. During this initial period (first five hundred cycles) the resource
(obsidian) is not yet introduced in the lattice though search dynamics are being
developed.
Matching Dynamics
If within nmax steps the travelling agent finds a partner with whom it had no previous
exchange links, then a permanent link is established between the two agents with
probability pe, which introduces the possibility that exchanges may be rejected.
We also implement the idea that the exchange network is exposed to occasional
alterations (e.g. environmental, situations of conflict, etc.) that may induce the rejection
of exchange with partners whereby with a small probability pb any non-local exchange
path is assumed to be broken and no longer available to any of the partners.
Resource Production
Villages producing obsidian are those located in the northern area of the space, in a
rough attempt to reproduce the area of Cappadocian obsidian sources. In each cycle,
these villages produce more obsidian than the quantity needed for their own use in
order to exchange it, thus inserting the resource into the exchange network. All villages
within a distance dp to the source region are labelled as ‘producers’ and introduce a
fixed quantity of the resource into the system during each cycle (the specific value of
this quantity is irrelevant, since the obsidian is measured in this study in relative units of
obsidian with respect to flint, assuming that the total amount of annual consumption of
lithic resources is similar in all the villages). Villages located on or adjacent to the
Ortega et al.sources produce the maximum of 100 units of obsidian per cycle. Transport costs are
also taken into account by assuming that the quantity of resource production decays
linearly with the distance to the source, so those ‘producers’ located at distance dp to the
source will be able to introduce just a fraction fp of the resource compared to the
‘producers’ adjacent to the source region. For example, those villages located 3 cells
away from the obsidian sources (45 km) produce 100−(2.5×3), or 92.5 units of
obsidian, those located 10 cells away produce 100−(2.5×10) or 75 units of obsidian,
up to distance dp, which is the limit of the production area (12 cells/180 km in our
standard simulation) and after which obsidian is only transferred through exchange.
Resource Consumption and Exchange
Obsidian is defined as a non-perishable commodity that can be divided into fractions.
The presence of obsidian in an archaeological site is the result of consumption and
discard of tools or knapping by-products (Torrence 1986, p. 5; Astruc et al. 2007). For
the simulation, agents knap, use, and discard their entire stock of obsidian in each cycle.
In the initial stages of our model that we present here, more complex behaviours of
obsidian management (exchange and stocking of cores or blanks, recycling of tools...)
are not considered. While in reality the situation is more complex, we initially condition
that the quantity of material needed for making tools is equal for all of the communities.
If the quantity of obsidian available in one community is not sufficient for their needs,
other types of stone materials such as flint are used for making tools.
Communities consume a fixed proportion fc of the resource available, while the rest
is exchanged. In this way, different fixed ratios of consumption/exchange (i.e. 90 %/
10 %) can be tested.
The exchange dynamics follow an egalitarian rule in which every village divides a
fraction of the resources not used for their own consumption among exchange partners
who have fewer resources than themselves. The same quantity of obsidian is therefore
transferred to sites where resource availability is lower.
Model Summary and Rules
According to the model description given above, the initial version of our model
contains eight different parameters:
pc Probability of cell occupation.
pt Probability of a village deciding to begin a new journey/search for new partners.
pb Probability of breakage of exchange link
nmax Number of maximum cells visited during a journey.
pe Probability of exchange acceptance.
dp Size of production region.
fp Degree of the linear decrement in the quantity of obsidian which is directly
acquired from the source of obsidian by each obsidian-extracting village. These
obsidian-extracting villages are those located at a certain distance from the
source (180 km for the standard simulation). The linear decrement depends on
the distance between the village and the source.
fc Consumption/exchange ratio.
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangeThe practical rules that are used to run the model can be summarized in the
following algorithm:
1. Assign an agent (village) to each cell in the lattice with probability pc.
2. Establish local connections between each village and all villages present in the
eight nearest squares of the lattice.
For the first five hundred cycles:
3. With probability pt, each agent in the lattice can take a journey (of maximum size
nmax cells) based on a correlated random walk (as described above) to search for
new exchange partners.
4. If new partners are found during the journey, an exchange link is established
between them with probability pe.
5. Any of the existing non-local links can be broken with probability pb.
For the remaining cycles (up to three thousand):
6. Apply rules 3 to 5.
7. Assume that all villages within a distance dp from the source region acquire new
resources in a proportion that decreases linearly with distance from source. The
degree of the linear decrement is fp.
8. All villages that have available resources consume a fraction fc of them and
exchange the rest, transferring the same quantity to all partners that have fewer
resources.
First Results of the Simulation
The results of the simulation can be observed in Fig. 4 and the values of the parameters
used are shown in Table 2. At the left of the graph we can observe the transfer of
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100 Renfrew's model
Reference model
Archaeological data
Relative consumption
Distance to obsidian source (km)
Fig. 4 Results of the simulation of the down-the line model (left), of a small-world type network using the
parameters specified in Table 2 (centre), and of results of the proportion of obsidian to flint recovered from
archaeological sites in the Levant during the PPNB (right). The dotted line represents 0.5 % obsidian, which is
the mean quantity of obsidian reaching the southern Levant
Ortega et al.obsidian obtained using Renfrew’s model, where obsidian is transferred from one
village to its neighbouring village (up to one cell of distance), and no village is able
to establish contact with further villages (pt =0).
In this scenario the quantity of obsidian transferred through such a regular network
falls very quickly and quantities corresponding to 0.5 % of the lithic assemblage, are
present only at 250 km from the source of origin. Thus, the 2D simulation of Renfrew’s
model (down-the-line transfer) results in the same conclusion obtained for the linear
simulation (1D), which is that in both cases, obsidian does not reach the southern Levant.
In the middle of this same graph (Fig. 4), we can observe the results of the
simulation when some villages (20 %) are allowed to jump and contact further partners
for obsidian exchange using a CRW search strategy. In this case, obsidian is transferred
in a more efficient way, and quantities of obsidian corresponding to 0.5 % of the lithic
assemblage are present at around 450 km away from the source of origin. Finally, at the
right of the same graph, the archaeological results of the proportion of obsidian to flint
at PPNB sites in the Levant are shown. As noted by Renfrew, the quantity of obsidian
in archaeological sites falls with distance following a logarithmic function. The archaeological data show more efficient distribution of obsidian than our model, as quantities
corresponding to 0.5 % of obsidian in the lithic assemblage are observed at a distance
of around 750 km from the source of origin.
Firstly, this simulation indicates the inadequacy of Renfrew’s model to explain the
distribution of obsidian in the Levant during the PPNB. Secondly, the simulation
demonstrates that alternative small-world type networks result in a more efficient
distribution of obsidian though the small-world model that we have designed for this
simulation still does not adequately replicate the archaeological data. We shall discuss
the implications of this conclusion later, after showing how the different variables used
in this simulation behave with respect to the capacity of the model to transfer obsidian
over long distances.
Figure 5 reflects how the fraction of villages allowed to jump using a random walk
(parameter pt; probability of a village deciding to begin a new journey) for the purpose
of contacting further partners, influences the efficiency in the distribution of obsidian.
As can be observed, this is not a very relevant variable, as the results obtained for 5 %
are similar to those obtained when 50 % of the villages are allowed to carry out the
random walk. This means that after the simulation model is left to run for some time,
only a small quantity of villages able to jump are able to establish the distant links that
in turn enable a better distribution of obsidian.
Table 2 A list of the parameters
used in the simulation represented
in Fig. 4 onward
Parameter
pc 0.2 (280 agents)
pt 0.1
pb 0.001s
nmax 8 (120 km)
pe 1
dp 180 km
fp 100−(2.5×cell number)
fc 0.5
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangeIn Fig. 6 we can observe that the fraction of cells which are occupied by a village
(parameter pc; population density) is not important for the distribution of obsidian, as
the results obtained with 5 % of the cells occupied is similar to those obtained with
50 %. In other words, a populated landscape is not necessary for explaining obsidian
distribution during the PPNB. In addition, the existence of many villages, which are
able to consume obsidian within a small-world network, does not affect the efficiency
of obsidian transfer over long distances.
Figure 7 illustrates how the change in degree of collaboration between villages
(parameter pe; probability of exchange acceptance) affects obsidian distribution in our
model. Twenty percent of villages accepting non-local exchange produces similar
0 200 400 600 800
1E-5
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Distance to obsidian source (km)
Relative consumption
pt =0
pt =0.05
pt =0.1
pt =0.2
pt =0.3
pt =0.5
Fig. 5 Results of the simulation of obsidian distribution depending on the number of villages allowed to jump
to contact distant exchange partners using a random walk (parameter pt: probability of a village deciding to
begin a new journey). The dotted line represents 0.5 % obsidian, which is the mean quantity of obsidian
reaching the southern Levant
0 200 400 600 800
1E-5
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Distance to obsidian source (km)
Relative consumption
pc =0.05
p c =0.1
p c =0.2
p c =0.3
p c =0.4
p c =0.5
Fig. 6 Results of the simulation of obsidian distribution depending on the quantity of villages occupying each
cell (parameter pc: population density). The dotted line represents 0.5 % obsidian, which is the mean quantity
of obsidian reaching the southern Levant
Ortega et al.results to higher collaboration rates, demonstrating that this variable is not relevant in
this case.
It would seem logical that the increase in distance from which a village can get direct
access to an obsidian source (parameter dp: size of production region) would considerably increase the distances over which obsidian could be transferred. In Fig. 8, we
show the results of the simulation carried out with variations (from 75 to 180 km) in the
size of the area in which villages could have had direct access to obsidian outcrops.
This variable has limited influence on the final results of obsidian transfer. With a 180km radius of direct access to the sources, obsidian arrives further (around 450 km for
quantities corresponding to 0.5 % obsidian) than with a 75 km radius of direct access
(around 350 km for the same quantity). However, this variable seems not to affect the
efficiency of the mechanisms of exchange, as the increase in the distance at which a
0 200 400 600 800
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Relative consumption
Distance to obsidian source (km)
p e =0
p e =0.2
p e =0.4
p e =0.5
p e =1
Fig. 7 Results of the simulation of obsidian distribution depending on the degree of collaboration between
villages (parameter pe: probability of exchange acceptance). The dotted line represents 0.5 % obsidian, which
is the mean quantity of obsidian reaching the southern Levant
0 200 400 600 800
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Distance to obsidian source (km)
Relative consumption
d p =75 km
d p =120 km
d p =150 km
d p =180 km
Fig. 8 Results of the simulation of obsidian distribution depending on the distance from which villages can
have direct access to obsidian sources (parameter dp: size of production region). The dotted line represents
0.5 % obsidian, which is the mean quantity of obsidian reaching the southern Levant
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian Exchangecertain quantity of obsidian is transferred (450–350=100 km) is similar to the increment in the radius of direct access itself (180–75=105 km). In other words, a higher
radius of direct access only nears the start line to the finish line, without qualitatively
affecting the distribution of obsidian. That means that in order to transfer obsidian to
the southern Levant, the type of exchange network is critical, while the influence of the
distance from which Neolithic communities can obtain obsidian directly from the
source is secondary.
The length of the journey carried out by agents of villages allowed to find non-local
partners by CRW (parameter nmax: number of maximum cells visited during a journey), is
relevant for the distribution of obsidian over long distances, as can be observed in Fig. 9.
Longer journeys to search for exchange partners result in a more distant distribution of
obsidian. If journeys are longer than 14 cells (210 km), quantities of obsidian (around
0.5 %, see dotted line) can reach distances of 650 km (southern Levant), as was the case
during the PPNB. However, it is difficult to assume that such distant exchange links
(210 km), implying approximately 1 week’s walk, could have been established and
regularly maintained during the Neolithic. Though it is difficult to estimate the maximum
length of these distant links, we think that 120 km (around 4 day’s walk) is a reasonable
limit for maintaining a regular exchange relationship during the PPNB.
In inputting different ratios of obsidian consumption/exchange (parameter fc: consumption/exchange ratio), we observe (Fig. 10) that this variable is extremely significant. 80 % obsidian consumption, which implies only 20 % obsidian exchange to other
villages, results in 0.5 % of the obsidian of the total lithic assemblage reaching a
maximum of 350 km from the source of origin. As we saw above, 50 % obsidian
consumption/exchange results in obsidian reaching 450 km from the source of origin,
while to achieve a transfer of 0.5 % of the obsidian as far as the southern Levant, very
low ratios of consumption (10 %) and very high ratios of transfer (90 %) in each node
of the network are needed. Without completely ruling out this possibility, it is nonetheless unlikely that PPNB societies would have regularly transferred most of the
obsidian they had obtained to their exchange partners.
0 200 400 600 800
1E-5
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Distance to obsidian source (km)
Relative consumption
nmax =4
nmax =6
nmax =8
nmax =10
nmax =12
nmax =14
Fig. 9 Results of the simulation of obsidian distribution depending on the length of the journey (parameter
nmax: number of maximum cells visited during a journey). The dotted line represents 0.5 % obsidian, which is
the mean quantity of obsidian reaching the southern Levant
Ortega et al.In summary, our first simulation results confirm that obsidian does not reach distant
regions such as the southern Levant, using the down-the-line model. Therefore, this
model of exchange is not pertinent for explaining how obsidian was exchanged during
the PPNB period. Simulations also indicate that a small-world network model of
exchange offers a more realistic scenario, as the results of the simulation better
resemble the archaeological data. Inside this small-world network model of obsidian
exchange, two variables are critical for the distribution of obsidian over very long
distances (up to 800 km), as is observed in the archaeological record. These include: (1)
the variation in the ratio of consumption/exchange (parameter fc) and (2) the length of
the links established by the villages to carry out their exchanges (parameter nmax). If the
consumption is low in relation to the exchange (around 20 % consumption and 80 %
exchange) or if some villages establish distant links for exchange with partners (at least
200 km), obsidian can be transferred over very long distances, matching the archaeological data. However, as we have previously stated, it is not reasonable to assume a
significant reduction of the consumption/exchange ratio in each node or a massive
extension of the distance at which exchange links can be established and maintained in
this period.
Even if our first results indicate that a type of small-world exchange network could
explain the characteristics of obsidian exchange during the PPNB, our model has not
yet succeeded in precisely replicating the archaeological data. Our results have demonstrated that there is great potential in continued experimentation with other types of
small-world networks in order to improve our results regarding the distance of obsidian
transfer. In our current simulation, all villages are able to undertake a random walk. In
forthcoming simulations, we shall test networks where only some villages are able to
establish further links and where these links are preferentially established with villages
that also possess further links. We believe that this type of network would allow for a
more fluent transmission of obsidian between villages that are interconnected with
further links, while the remaining villages would form regional clusters that would be
supplied by local networks.
0 200 400 600 800
1E-5
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Distance to obsidian source (km)
Relative consumption
fc =0.2
fc =0.3
fc =0.4
fc =0.5
fc =0.6
fc =0.7
fc =0.8
Fig. 10 Results of the simulation of obsidian distribution depending on the ratio of obsidian consumption/
exchange (parameter fc: consumption/exchange ratio). The dotted line represents 0.5 % obsidian, which is the
mean quantity of obsidian reaching the southern Levant
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangeConclusions and Perspectives
The emergence of long-distance trade in resources has played a minimal role in debates
on the process of neolithisation and its socio-economic consequences, despite the fact
that intensified inter-regional interaction was likely to have had a part in enabling the
transition from hunter–gatherer to farming societies. In order to understand the relationship between long distance exchange and neolithisation, it is altogether necessary to
understand the mechanisms of exchange in the region.
The analyses of the origin of obsidian and its distribution give us access to accurate
information on certain aspects of prehistoric long-distance exchange. In the last few
decades, a great deal of obsidian data has been gathered from pre-Neolithic and
Neolithic sites and a considerable effort has been made to precisely characterise the
numerous geological sources of obsidian in the Near East. In the meantime, however,
there has been little effort to reassess or to rebuild the main model used to explain the
mechanisms of exchange of this material (Earle 2010). The down-the-line model
continues to be commonly used to explain obsidian distribution in the Near East as
well as to explain exchange systems in many other prehistoric contexts (Torrence
1986). While Renfrew’s Law of Monotonic Decrement and down-the-line model were
seminal, allowing for new theoretical and methodological perspectives, their capacity
for explaining obsidian exchange in the Near East is limited. Despite their weakness
and an increasing imbalance with growing archaeological datasets, no alternative model
has been proposed that explains how obsidian can be found at extremely long distances
from its source origin.
ABM is a promising approach to understanding exchange and the mechanisms of
obsidian distribution in the Neolithic Near East. By simulating the down-the-line
model, a very regular network emerges with high clustering and a high average path.
This network only permits supply of obsidian to the areas near the obsidian sources. As
an alternative to this outcome, our model allowed some villages to carry out shortcuts
in the network, so that a small-world network emerged. This type of network shows
high clustering, whereby local networks are respected, and low average paths, whereby
information and objects can more efficiently flow through the system and supply the
whole region.
Our simulations have shown that the major variables sufficiently influencing long
distance transfer are the variation in the rate of consumption/exchange (fc) in each
village and the length of the links established by villages to carry out their exchanges
(nmax). Other variables such as the quantity of villages in the system (pc), the degree of
collaboration between long distance villages (pe) and the distance from which villages
have direct access to the obsidian sources (fp) are of minimal relevance. If we heavily
reduce the consumption ratio in each node in order to augment the quantity of obsidian
exchanged or if we allow agents to establish very distant links for exchange, obsidian
can reach very long distances. However, such scenarios are unlikely given the archaeological evidence. The type of exchange network remains the most relevant variable for
explaining how obsidian arrived to the southern Levant from the sources of origin,
which lie approximately 800 km away. A small-world network that permits certain
villages to establish distant exchange links seems to be the most effective way of
reducing the average path of the network, so as to permit a more fluid transmission of
obsidian through the network.
Ortega et al.For now, the comparison of our simulation results to the archaeological data have
confirmed that during the early Neolithic in the Near East, a type of small-world
network rather than a down-the-line model, was responsible for obsidian exchange at
long distances. While the model we have proposed and tested is clearly more effective
and realistic than previous ones, the archaeological evidence shows that obsidian
arrived even further and with more fluidity than even our simulations have been able
to replicate. This demonstrates that certain detailed characteristics of the PPNB exchange network remain untapped and untested at this preliminary stage. Judging from
the archaeological evidence available for the period, it is likely that a more hierarchical
network is needed, whereby only certain privileged interlinked villages are able to
establish long distance links. More complex networks that take hierarchical structures and
multiple variables into account (e.g. integrating supply from more than one obsidian
source zone) are currently being modelled so as to fine-tune our results and better approach
our reconstructions of past nascent exchange networks in the Neolithic Near East.
Acknowledgments This work was partially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy (grant SimulPastCSD-2010-00034 and HAR2010-21545-C02-01) and the Spanish Ministry of Culture (IPCE). VM and DC
acknowledge grant FIS2012-32334 funded by the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad. This
article greatly benefitted from the comments and suggestions of two anonymous reviewers.
References
Abbès, F., Bellot-Gurlet, L., Bressy, C., Cauvin, M. C., Gratuze, B., & Poupeau, G. (2001). Nouvelles
recherches sur l’obsidienne de Cheikh Hassan (vallée de l’Euphrate, Syrie) au Néolithique PPNA et
PPNB ancien. Syria, 78, 5–17.
Ammerman, A. J. (1979). Study of obsidian exchange networks in Calabria. World Archaeology, 11(1), 95–110.
Ammerman, A. J., Matessi, C., & Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1978). Some new approaches to the study on the
obsidian trade in the Mediterranean and adjacent areas. In I. Hodder (Ed.), The spatian organisation of
culture. New Approaches in Archaeology (pp. 179–190). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Arimura, M. (2007). Néolithisation de la Syrye du Nord-Ouest. L’évolution des industrie lithiques a Tell Ain
el-Kerkh (Bassin du Rouj, 8500-6000 CAL. BC). Unpublished PhD thesis, U.F.R. des Sciences
Humaines et Sociales, Université Lumière Lyon 2.
Astruc, L., Gratuze, B., Pelegrin, J., & Akkermans, P. (2007). From production to use: a parcel of obsidian
bladelets at SabiAbyad II. In L. Astruc, D. Binder, & F. Briois (Eds.), Technical Systems and Near
Eastern PPN Communities: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop, Fréjus, 2004 (pp. 327–342).
Antibes: APDCA.
Ataman, K. (1988). The Chipped Stone Assemblage from Can Hasan III: A Study in Typology, Technology
and Function. Unpublished PhD thesis, Institute of Archaeology, University College London.
Aurenche, O., Évin, J. & Gasco, J. (1987). Une séquence chronologique dans le Proche Orient de 12000 à
3700 BC et sa relation avec les données du radiocarbone. In Aurenche, O., Évin, J. and Hours, F. (eds.),
Chronologies du Proche Orient, BAR International Series, 379, Oxford, pp. 21–37.
Aurenche, O., Galet, P., Régagnon-Caroline, E., & Évin, J. (2001). Proto-neolithic and neolithic cultures in the
Middle East. The birth of agriculture, livestock rising and ceramics: a calibrated 14C chronology 12,5005,500 cal BC. In: H. J. Bruins, I. Carmi, & E. Boaretto (Eds), Near East Chronology: Archaeology and
Environment. Proceedings of the 17th International 14C Conference, RADIOCARBON, Vol. 43, Nr 3,
pp. 1191–1202.
Axelrod, R. (1997). Advancing the Art of simulation in the Social Sciences. In R. Conte, R. Hegselmann, & P.
Terna (Eds.), Simulating social phenomena (pp. 21–40). Berlin: Springer.
Axtell, R. L., Epstein, J. M., Dean, J. S., Gumerman, G. J., Swedlund, A. C., Harburger, J., Chakravarty, S.,
Hammond, R., Parker, J., & Parker, M. (2002). Population growth and collapse in a multiagent model of
the Kayenta Anasazi in Long House Valley. PNAS, 99(3), 7275–7279.
Balkan-Atli, N. (1989). L’industrie lithique de Boytepe (Turquie). Paléorient, 15(1), 87–90.
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangeBalkan-Atlı, N., Binder, D., & Kuzucuoglu, C. (1999). L’atelier neolithique de Kömürcü - Kaletepe: fouilles
de 1998. Anatolia Antiqua, VII, 231–243.
Balkan-Atlı, N., Kayacan, N., Özbasaran, M., & Yildirim, S. (2001). Variability in the Neolithic arrowheads of
Central Anatolia (typological, technological and chronological aspects). In I. Caneva, C. Lemorini, D.
Zampetti, & P. Biagi (Eds.), Beyond Tools. Redefining the PPN Lithic Assemblages of the Levant.
Proceedings of the Thirds Workshop on PPN Chipped Lithic Industries (Studies in Early Near Eastern
Production, Subsistence, and Environment, Vol. 9, pp. 27–43). Berlin: Ex oriente.
Barge, O., & Chataigner, C. (2003). The procurement of obsidian: factors influencing the choice of deposits.
Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids, 323, 172–179.
Barrat, A., Barthélemy, M., & Vespignani, A. (2008). Dynamical processes on complex networks. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bar-Yosef, O., & Belfer-Cohen, A. (1989). The Levantine “PPNB” interaction sphere. In I. Hershkovitz (Ed.),
People and culture in change: proceedings of the second symposium on Upper Paleolithic, Mesolithic
and Neolithic populations of Europe and the Mediterranean Basin (BAR International Series, Vol. 508(i),
pp. 59–72). Oxford: Archaeopress.
Bar-Yosef, O., & Meadow, R. (1995). The origins of agriculture in the Near East. In T. D. Price & A. G.
Gebauer (Eds.), Last hunters–first farmers: new perspectives on the prehistoric transition to agriculture
(pp. 39–94). Santa Fe: School for American Research.
Bordaz, J. (1966). Suberde, 1965. Anatolian Studies, 16, 32–33.
Brantingham, P. J. (2006). Measuring forager mobility. Current Anthropology, 47(3), 435–459.
Briois, F., Gratuze, B., & Guilaine, J. (1997). Obsidienne du site néolithique précéramique de
Shillourokambos, Chypre. Paléorient, 23(1), 95–112.
Burian, F., & Friedman, E. (1988). A note on the obsidian finds from the pre pottery Neolithic B Site 109 Near
Nahal Lavan, Negev. Journal of the Israel Prehistoric Society, 21, 95–98.
Burian, F., Friedman, E., & Mintz, E. (1999). Nahal Lavan 109—a Pre-Pottery Neolithic site in the Western Negev,
Israel. Festchrift für Gunter Samulla. Materialien zur von - und frühgeschichte von Hessen, 8, 95–120.
Carter, T., Conolly, J., & Spasojevic, A. (2005). The chipped stone. In I. Hodder (Ed.), Changing materialities
at Çatalhöyük: reports from the 1995–99 seasons (McDonald Institute Monographs, Vol. 39, pp. 221–
283). Ankara: British Institute at Ankara.
Carter, T., Le Bourdonnec, F. X., Kartal, M., Poupeau, G., Calligaro, T., & Moretto, P. (2011). Marginal
perspectives: sourcing obsidian from the Öküzini Cave (SW Turkey). Paléorient, 37(2), 123–149.
Cassi, L., & Zirulia, L. (2008). The opportunity cost of social relations: on the effectiveness of small worlds.
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 18, 77–101.
Cauvin, J. (1989). La stratigraphie de Cafer Höyük-Est (Turquie) et les origines du PPNB du Taurus.
Paléorient, 15(1), 75–86.
Cauvin, M. C. (1995). L’industrie lithique de Tell Aswad. In H. de Contenson (Ed.), Aswad et Ghoraifé. Sites
néolithiques en Damascène (Syrie) aux IXème et VIIIème millénaires avant l’ère chrétienne, Bibliothèque
Archéologique et Historique (Vol. CXXXVII, pp. 83–98). Beyrouth: Institut Français d’Archéologie du
Proche-Orient.
Cauvin, J. (2000). The origins of agriculture in the Near East: a symbolic interpretation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cauvin, M.-C. (2002). L’obsidienne et sa diffusion dans le Proche-Orient Néolithique. In J. Guilaine (Ed.),
Matériaux, productions, circulations du Néolithique à l’Age du Bronze, Séminaire du Collège de France
(pp. 13–30). Paris: Éditions Errance.
Cauvin, M. C. (2004). Mureybet IV. In O. Aurenche, M. Le Mière, & P. Sanlaville (Eds.), From the river to the
sea. The Palaeolithic and the Neolithic on the Euphrates and in the Northern Levant. Studies in honour of
Lorraine Copeland (British Archaeological Reports, International Series, Vol. 1263, pp. 323–334).
Oxford: Archaeopress.
Cauvin, M. C., Gourgaud, A., Gratuze, B., Arnaud, N., Poupeau, G., Poidevin, J.-L., & Chataigner, C. (Eds.).
(1998). L’obsidienne au Proche et Moyen Orient: Du volcan à l’outil (British Archaeological Reports,
International Series, Vol. 738). Oxford: Archaeopress.
Cauvin, M.-C., & Chataigner, C. (1998). Distribution de l’obsidienne dans les sites archéologiques du Proche
et Moyen Orient. In M.-C. Cauvin, A. Gourgaud, B. Gratuze, N. Arnaud, G. Poupeau, J.-L. Poidevin, &
C. Chataigner (Eds.), L’obsidienne au Proche et Moyen Orient: Du volcan à l’outil (British
Archaeological Reports, International Series, Vol. 738). Oxford: Archaeopress.
Chataigner, C., & Barge, O. (2005). L’analyse de la circulation de l’obsidienne dans le nord du Proche-Orient
préhistorique. In J.-F. Berger, F. Bertoncello, F. Braemer, G. Davtian, & M. Gazenbeck (Eds.), Temps et
Espaces de l’Homme en Société, Analyses et Modèles Spatiaux en Archéologie. XXVe rencontres
internatinales d’archéologie et d’histoire d’Antibes (pp. 405–410). Antibes: Editions APDCA.
Ortega et al.de Contenson, H. (1992). Préhistoire de Ras Shamra—Ougarit VIII. Paris: Editions Recherche sur les
Civilisations.
de Contenson, H. (1995). Aswad et Ghoraifé. Sites néolithiques en Damascène (Syrie) aux IXème et VIIIème
millénaires avant l’ère chrétienne (Bibliothèque Archéologique et Historique, Vol. CXXXVII). Beyrouth:
Institut Français d’Archéologie du Proche-Orient.
de Contenson, H. (2000). Ramad: site néolithique en Damascène (Syrie) aux VIIIe et VIIe millénaires avant
l’ère chrétienne (Bibliothèque Archéologique et Historique, Vol. CLVII). Beyrouth: Institut Français
d’Archéologie du Proche-Orient.
Copeland, L. (1989). The flint and obsidian artifacts of Tell Sabi Abyad. In P. M. M. G. Akkermans (Ed.),
Excavations at Tell Sabi Abyad (British Archaeological Reports, International Series, Vol. 468, pp. 237–
284). Oxford: Archaeopress.
Coskunsu, G. (2007). The End of the Pre-Pottery Neolithic in the Middle Euphrates Valley. The Lithic
Assemblages of Mezraa Teleilat, Southeastern Turkey. Unpublished PhD thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Harvard University.
Crowfoot-Payne, J. (1983). The flint industries of Jericho. In K. M. Kenyon (Ed.), Excavations at Jericho
(Vol. 5, pp. 622–758). London: British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem.
Dean, J. S., Gumerman, G. J., Epstein, J. M., Axtell, R. L., Swedlund, A. C., Parker, M. T., & McCarroll.
(2000). Understanding Anasazi culture change through agent-based modeling. In T. A. Kohler & G. J.
Gumerman (Eds.), Dynamics in human and primate societies, agent-based modeling of social and spatian
process (Santa Fe Institute, Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, pp. 179–205). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Delre, S. A., Jager, W., Bijmolt, T. H. A., & Janssen, M. A. (2010). Will is spread or not? The effects of social
influences and network topology on innovation diffusion. Journal of Product Innovation Management,
27, 267–282.
Earle, T. K., & Ericson, J. E. (Eds.). (1977). Exchange systems in prehistory. New York: Academic.
Earle, T. K. (2010). Exchange Systems in Prehistory. In C. D. Dillian & C. L. White (Eds.), Trade and
exchange: archaeological studies from history and prehistory (pp. 205–217). New York: Springer.
Epstein, J M. & Axtell, R. (1996). Geowing artificial societies: social sciences from the bottom up, Brookings
Institution, Cambridge, MIT Press, Washington.
Ericson, J. E. (1977). Egalitarian Exchange Systems in California: A Preliminary View. In J. E. Ericson & T.
Earle (Eds.), Exchange systems in prehistory (pp. 109–126). New York: Academic.
Esin, U., Biçakçi, E., Özbasaran, M., Balkan Atli, N., Berker, D., Yamur, I., & Korkurt, A. (1991). Salvage
excavations at the Pre-Pottery site of Asikli Höyük in Central Anatolia. Anatolica, 17, 123–174.
Evans, T., Knappett, C., & Rivers, R. (2009). Using Statistical Physics to Understand Relational Space: A
Case Study from Mediterranean Prehistory. In D. Lane, D. Pumain, S. van der Leeuw, & G. West (Eds.),
Complexity perspectives on innovation and social change (Methodos, Vol. 7, pp. 451–79). Berlin: Springer.
Fujii, S. (1995). Hacibeyli Höyük: a Pre-Pottery Neolithic site in the Yay-Gölü lake basin, Central Anatolia. In
M. Mori & M. Ohmo (Eds.), Essays on Ancient Anatolia and its surrounding civilizations (Bulletin of the
Middle Eastern Culture Center in Japan, Vol. 8, pp. 131–152). Weisbaden: Harrassowitz.
Gopher, A. (1989). The Flint Assemblages of Munhata (Israel). Final report, Les Cahiers du Centre de
Recherche Français de Jérusalem, 4. Paris: Association Paléorient.
Gopher, A. (1990). Mujahiya, an Early Pre-Pottery Neolithic B site in the Golan Heights. Tel Aviv, 17(2), 115–
143.
Gopher, A. (1997). Horvat Galil—an early PPN site in the Upper Galilee, Israel. Tel Aviv, 24(2), 183–222.
Goring-Morris, A. N., Goren, Y., Horwitz, L. K., Hershkovitz, I., Lieberman, R., Sarel, J., & Bar-Yosef, D.
(1995). The 1992 season of excavations at the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B settlement of Kfar Hahoresh.
Journal of The Israel Prehistoric Society, 26, 74–121.
Goring-Morris, N., & Belfer-Cohen, A. (2011). Neolithization processes in the Levant: the outer envelope.
Current Anthropology, 52(4), 195–208.
Gratuze, B. (1998). Les méthodes de caractérisation de l’obsidienne. In M. C. Cauvin, A. Gourgaud, B.
Gratuze, N. Arnaud, G. Poupeau, J.-L. Poidevin, & C. Chataigner (Eds.), L’obsidienne au Proche et
Moyen Orient: Du volcan à l’outil (British Archaeological Reports, International Series, Vol. 738, pp. 31–
48). Oxford: Archaeopress.
Gratuze, B. (1999). Obsidian characterisation by laser ablation ICP-MS and its application to the prehistoric
trade in the Mediterranean and the Near East: the sources and distribution of obsidian within the Aegean
and Anatolia. Journal of Archaeological Science, 26, 869–881.
Guilaine, J., Briois, F., & Vigne, J. D. (Eds.). (2011). Shillourokambos Tome 1. Une établissement néolithique
pré-céramique à Chypre, Archéologie d’aujourd’hui. Arles: Editions Errance and Ecole Française
d’Athènes.
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian ExchangeHelmer, D., Gourichon, L., Monchot, H., Petersand, J., & Saña Segui, M. (2005). Identifying early domestic
cattle from Pre-PotteryNeolithic sites on the Middle Euphrates using sexualdimorphism. In J.-D. Vigne, J.
Peters, & D. Helmer (Eds.), The first steps of animal domestication (pp. 86–95). London: Oxbow.
Hodder, I. (1974). Regression analysis of some trade and marketing patterns. World Archaeology, 6(2), 172–
189.
Hodder, I. (1982). Toward a contextual approach to prehistoric exchange. In J. E. Ericson & T. Earle (Eds.),
Contexts for prehistoric exchange (pp. 199–211). New York: Academic.
Hodder, I., & Orton, C. (1976). Spatial analysis in archaeology. New studies in archaeology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Khalaily, H., Bar-Yosef, O., Barzilai, O., Boaretto, E., Bocquentin, F., Eirikh-Rose, A., Greenhut, Z., GoringMorris, A. N., Dosseur, G. L., Marder, O., Sapir-Hen, L., & Yizhaq, M. (2007). Excavations at Motza in
the Judean Hills and the early Pre-Pottery Neolithic B in the Southern Levant. Paléorient, 33(2), 5–37.
Kohler, T., & Gumerman, G. J. (2000). Dynamic in human and primate societies. Agent-based modeling of
social and spatial processes (Santa Fe Institute, Studies in the Sciences of Complexity). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kuijt, I. (2000). People and space in early agricultural villages: exploring daily lives, community size and
architecture in the late Pre-Pottery Neolithic. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology, 19, 75–102.
Kuijt, I., & Goring-Morris, A. N. (2002). Foraging, farming and social complexity in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic
of the South-Central Levant: a review and synthesis. Journal of World Prehistory, 16(4), 361–440.
Lechevallier, M. (1978a). L’industrie lithique (Beisamoun). In M. Lechevallier (Ed.), Abou Gosh et Beisamoun.
Deux gisements du VIIe millénaire avant l’Ère Chrétienne en Israel (Mémoires et Travaux du Centre de
Recherches Préhistoriques Français de Jérusalem, Vol. 2, pp. 153–172). Paris: Association Paléorient.
Lechevallier, M. (1978b). L’industrie lithique (Abu Gosh). In M. Lechevallier (Ed.), Abou Gosh et Beisamoun.
Deux gisements du VIIe millénaire avant l’Ère Chrétienne en Israel (Mémoires et Travaux du Centre de
Recherches Préhistoriques Français de Jérusalem, Vol. 2, pp. 41–74). Paris: Association Paléorient.
Molist, M., Ferrer, A., González, J. E., Ibáñez, J. J., & Palomo, T. (2001). Élaboration et usage de l’industrie
lithique tailée de Tell Halula (Syrie du Nord) depuis le 8700 jusqu’à 7500 b.p.: état de la recherche. In I.
Caneva, C. Lemorini, D. Zampetti, & P. Biagi (Eds.), Beyond Tools. Redefining the PPN lithic assemblages of the Levant. Proceedings of the Thirds Workshop on PPN Chipped Lithic Industries (Studies in
Early Near Eastern Production, Subsistence, and Environment, Vol. 9, pp. 243–256). Berlin: Ex oriente.
Mortensen, P. (1970). A preliminary study of the chipped stone industry from Beidha, an Early Neolithic
Village in Southern Jordan. Acta Archaeologica, 41, 1–55.
Nishiaki, Y. (2000). Lithic technology of Neolithic Syria (British Archaeological Reports, International Series,
Vol. 840). Oxford: Archaeopress.
Özbasaran, M. (1999). Musular: A general assessment on a New Neolithic site in Central Anatolia. In M.
Özdogan & N. Basgelen (Eds.), Neolithic in Turkey. The cradle of civilization (pp. 147–155). Istanbul:
Arkeoloji ve Sanat Yayinlari.
Peltenburg E. (Ed.) (1998). Lemba Archaeological Project (Cyprus) II.1A. Excavations at KissonergaMosphilia, 1979–1992, Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology 70, 2,. Åström Verlag, Jonsered.
Renfrew, C. (1975). Trade as Action at a Distance: Questions of Integration and Communication. In J. Sabloff
& C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky (Eds.), Ancient civilizations and trade (pp. 3–59). Albuquerque: University
of New Mexico Press.
Renfrew, C. (1977). Alternative models for exchange and spatial distribution. In T. K. Earle & J. E. Ericson
(Eds.), Exchanges systems in prehistory (pp. 71–90). London: Academic.
Renfrew, C., Dixon, J. E., & Cann, J. R. (1968). Further analysis of Near Eastern Obsidian. Proceedings of the
Prehistoric Society, 34, 319–331.
Sahlins, M. D. (1974). Stone Age economics. London: Tavistock.
Santos, J. I., Poza, D.J.,Galán, J. M. & López-Paredes, A. (2012). Evolution of Equity Norms in Small-World
Networks. Dyscrete Dynamics in Nature and Society, 2012.
Sidrys, R. V. (1977). Mass-Distance Measures for the Maya Obsidian Trade. In T. Earle & J. E. Ericson (Eds.),
Exchange systems in prehistory (Studies in Archaeology, pp. 91–107). New York: Academic.
Thalmann, J.-P. (2006). Obsidian at Tell Arqa, North Lebanon. A stop-over point on a trade route?
BaghdaderMitteilungen, 37, 575–593.
Torrence, R. (1986). Production and exchange of stone tools prehistoric obsidian in the Aegean. Cambridge:
New Cambridge University Press.
Varoutsikos, B., & Chataigner, C. (2012). Obsidatabase: Collecter et organiser les donnés relatives à
l’obsidienne préhistorique au Proche-Orient et en Transcaucasie. In O. Henry (Ed.), Archéologies et
espaces parcorus. Actes de Premières Rencontres d’Archéologie de l’IFEA, 11-13 Novembre 2010 (pp.
11–22). Istambul: Institut Français d’Études Anatoliennes Georges Dumézil.
Ortega et al.Watkins, T. (2008). Supra-regional networks in the Neolithic of Southwest Asia. Journal of World Prehistory,
21, 139–171.
Watts, D. J. (2004). The “New” science of networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 30, 243–270.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of “small-world” networks. Nature, 393, 440–442.
Wilhite, A. (2001). Bilateral trade and “Small-World” networks. Computational Economics, 18, 49–64.
Wright, G. A. (1970). On trade and culture process in prehistory. Current Anthropology, 11(2), 172–173.
Yellin, J. (2012). The Source of Obsidian Artifacts. In Y. Garfinkel, D. Dag, H. Khalaily, O. Marder, I.
Milevski, & A. Ronen (Eds.), The Pre-Pottery Neolithic B village of Yiftahel. The 1980s and 1990
Excavations (Bibliotheca Neolithic Asiae meridionalis et occidentalis, pp. 243–245). Berlin: Ex oriente.
A Multi-Agent-Based Modelling of Obsidian Exchange