Buying local or ancient outsourcing? Locating production of prismatic
obsidian blades in Bronze-Age Northern Mesopotamia
Ellery Frahm*
Department of Archaeology, The University of Sheffield, Northgate House, West Street, Sheffield S1 4ET, United Kingdom
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 20 May 2013
Received in revised form
30 September 2013
Accepted 4 October 2013
Keywords:
Bronze Age
Northern Mesopotamia
Obsidian sourcing
Lithic analysis
Craft specialisation
Organisation of production
Prismatic blades
Canaanean blades
a b s t r a c t
It is widely held that crafting prismatic chert and obsidian blades was extremely specialised in the
Bronze-Age Near East. The prevalent narrative holds that there were just a few dedicated workshops in
Anatolia’s Upper Euphrates Valley, from which blade segments were exported to Northern Mesopotamia.
Due to the challenges of chert sourcing, obsidian has been incorporated into the narrative. Recently, Tell
Mozan was added to the proponents’ list of Mesopotamian sites with blades imported from Anatolian
workshops. Two issues are addressed in this paper. First, does archaeological evidence regarding the
spatial organisation of blade production support an interpretation that incomplete reduction sequences
imply off-site production? It is shown here that, at known workshop sites, the reduction sequence occurs
only in small portions of large urban centres, and even there certain reduction products are underrepresented. Second, do obsidians at Tell Mozan and other sites originate from sources near the proposed blade workshops? Highly diverse obsidians at Tell Mozan are inconsistent with a reliance on
Anatolian workshops, and a reassessment of prior sourcing studies reveals a regional “sourcescape” more
variable than generally thought. The result is a very different picture of lithic craft specialisation in
Northern Mesopotamia: diverse obsidian cores and preforms reaching the cities’ specialists involved in
household production principally for the local market.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Five decades of obsidian sourcing have established basic spatial
distribution trends across Anatolia, Mesopotamia, and the Levant.
Large-scale, supra-temporal patterns identified by Renfrew and
colleagues (Fig. 1; Cann and Renfrew, 1964; Renfrew et al., 1965,
1966, 1968) have been upheld by subsequent regional syntheses
(Cauvin and Chataigner, 1998; Chataigner et al., 1998). More often
than not, however, the forms in which obsidian was distributed
(e.g., finished tools, cores) are ambiguous. In an article titled “The
Phantom Obsidian Traders of the Jazirah,” Copeland (1995: 5) lists a
variety of outstanding questions:
How did the obsidian arrive at the sites? Are we certain that it
was imported? Who, exactly, collected the material? Were they
the same people as those who brought it to the Jazirah settlements? In what form did they transport it: natural lumps,
debited cores, finished artifacts? Was it brought directly to each
user/destination or to an intermediate spot?
Two decades later, organisation of production has received greater
attention (e.g., Astruc et al., 2007; Khalidi et al., 2009; al Quntar
et al., 2011; Khalidi, in press); however, Copeland’s issues remain
largely unanswered. These issues are arguably even more ambiguous for cherts, given methodological and interpretive challenges
in identifying their geological origins (see Shackley, 2008: 197e
198).
Across Northern Mesopotamia, the Early Bronze Age (EBA, circa
3300e2100 BCE) was a period of increasing urbanism and societal
complexity, largely attributed to agricultural surpluses that enabled
labour mobilisation and craft specialisation. During the mid-EBA
(circa 2600e2500 BCE), urban centres in Syria’s Upper Khabur
Basin (UKB; Fig. 2) grew markedly. Tell Leilan and Tell Hamoukar,
for example, expanded from 15 to 90 ha (Weiss and Courty, 1993;
Ur, 2002). Drawing upon satellite agricultural settlements, cities
attained populations as high as 14,000 (Wilkinson, 1997, 2000;
Wilkinson et al., 2007).
Flaked stone tools, frequently made of chert and obsidian,
remained an important aspect of Northern Mesopotamian material culture, even in urban settings. These sites’ lithic assemblages
Abbreviations: EBA, Early Bronze Age; LBA, Late Bronze Age; MBA, Middle
Bronze Age; MKB, Middle Khabur Basin; SBE, specialised blade export; UEV, Upper
Euphrates Valley; UKB, Upper Khabur Basin.
* Tel.: þ44 74 0299 0202.
E-mail addresses: e.frahm@sheffield.ac.uk, elleryfrahm@gmail.com.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Archaeological Science
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / j a s
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.10.007
Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621are largely composed of (1) prismatic blades, blade segments, and
blade-based tools (Fig. 3) and (2) ad hoc flake tools. The latter are
simple flakes, commonly little modified, used as expedient tools
for purposes that required no particular morphology. In the UKB,
ad hoc flake production involved, as aptly described by Akkermans
and Schwartz (2003), “smashing a nodule. with a heavier rock
into many smaller, irregular pieces” (169). Consequently, these
expedient tools pose interpretive challenges (Johnson, 1996),
largely lacking indicators of varied social and technological
choices. Thus, attention has focused principally on prismatic
blades, crafted of both chert and obsidian, that are products of
sophisticated, yet variable, chaînes opératoire. Such blades were
used for various cutting and scraping purposes, including agricultural activities, food and hide processing, and crafts such as
pottery and textile production (al Quntar et al., 2011; GromanYaroslavski et al., 2013).
A prevalent hypothesis holds that production of one type of
prismatic chert blade, called Canaanean blades, was extremely
specialised during the EBA (especially the Ninevite V period, 3000e
2500 BCE). It is argued that there were only a few dedicated
workshops in Anatolia’s Upper Euphrates Valley (UEV; Fig. 2), from
which Canaanean blade sections were exported throughout
Northern Mesopotamia (e.g., Anderson and Inizan, 1994; Chabot,
1999, 2002; Chabot et al., 2001; Chabot and Pelegrin, 2006, 2012;
Chabot and Eid, 2003, 2009) “and perhaps beyond” (Anderson
et al., 2004:123, Chabot and Eid, 2007:23).
Recently, Chabot and Eid (2009) added Tell Mozan (Figs. 1 and 2)
to their list of UKB sites with blades imported from Anatolian
workshops. This is based, in large part, on chert appearance:
This type of flint has been identified only in the Bingöl area in
southeastern Turkey, where the only Cananaean workshops
known to-date in Northern Mesopotamia were discovered. We
thus come to the conclusion that the flint blades of Mozan come
from the Anatolian workshops, as concluded for others sites in
the region. (810; translated)
Furthermore, they argue that Tell Mozan attests to the continuity of
this specialised exchange from the EBA into the Middle Bronze Age
(MBA, 2100e1600 BCE):
This had already been evidenced by the site of Tell Leilan, but the
singularity of this discovery, however, called for caution. Mozan
would thus confirm this conclusion and come to show, during
the Middle Bronze Age, workshops specialised in the manufacture of Canaanean blades and the exchange networks
necessary to redistribute them were always active. (819; translated)
Given the challenges of chert sourcing, obsidian sourcing has
become an important feature of this narrative (e.g., Chabot et al.,
2001:253e254, Chabot, 2002:62). Regarding obsidian prismatic
blades recovered at Tell Mozan, Chabot and Eid (2009) conclude that
Fig. 1. Near Eastern obsidian sources and the four obsidian interaction zones, circa 5000e3000 BCE (i.e., Late Neolithic to Early Bronze Age [EBA] I), proposed by Renfrew and Dixon
(1976). Sources of obsidian artefacts found at Tell Mozan are marked by filled black circles and labelled, whereas obsidian sources not currently represented at Tell Mozan are
marked by open circles. The locations marked for each source were chosen to represent the central locations of the obsidian, the primary source (if known), or the “type site” for
which a source is named. No endeavour is made here to precisely represent the full primary and secondary distribution of the obsidians.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621606these small blades are also the work of specialists. Are the
manufacturers of these products the same as for the Canaanean
blades? It is too early to answer this question, but chemical
analyses performed on obsidian pieces from the sites of Tell ‘Atij
and Tell Gudeda helped locate the geological origin of these
elements in the Bingöl region of Turkey, the same area from
which the Canaanean blades most likely come. (820; translated)
Therefore, they link specialised production of obsidian prismatic
blades at Tell Mozan to that of Canaanean blades, suggesting the
same specialists or workshops may have made both. This, in turn,
enables hypothesis testing using geochemical “fingerprints” of
obsidian rather than visual classifications of chert.
Two key issues are considered here. First, does archaeological
evidence regarding the organisation of Canaanean blade production and the spatial arrangement of its products at known workshop sites support an argument that incomplete blade reduction
sequences connote off-site production activities? A review of the
site literature reveals that urban household-scale blade production
yields irregular debitage distributions, and the reduction sequence
is complete in only small areas of large urban centres. Second, do
the obsidian artefacts at Tell Mozan and other archaeological sites
(including the Canaanean workshop sites in Anatolia) originate, as
claimed, from the Bingöl area? A majority of the sourced Tell Mozan
obsidian artefacts (77%) originated from sources other than the
Bingöl deposits (Nemrut Dag, Mus ̧ , Tendürek Dag, and Meydan Dag
in Eastern Anatolia and Göllü Dag in Central Anatolia). Furthermore, reassessments of earlier studies reveal a regional obsidian
“sourcescape” more complex and nuanced than widely thought.
When combined with the reduction products found at Tell
Mozan (Fig. 3), diverse obsidian sources and archaeological evidence regarding the potential socio-spatial organisation of production (i.e., the spatial distribution of Canaanean production and
debitage at known workshop sites) do not support the importation
of obsidian blade segments from workshops in the UEV. It is argued
here that local production of obsidian (and perhaps chert) prismatic blades is a viable counter-narrative. The result is a different
picture of lithic craft specialisation in Bronze-Age Northern Mesopotamia: obsidian cores and/or preforms from throughout Anatolia
reaching cities’ specialists involved in household production principally for the local market.
2. Background: Canaanean vs. non-Canaanean blades
Obsidian sourcing has been used to link the production and
specialisation of “Canaanean” prismatic blades and obsidian prismatic blades at Tell Mozan and other sites (e.g., Chabot et al.,
2001:253e254, Chabot, 2002:62, Chabot and Eid, 2009:820). It is
worth briefly discussing what is labelled as a “Canaanean” blade,
reasons why obsidian blades may be excluded from this type, and
the validity of associating production and specialisation of prismatic blades made from distinct raw materials.
Fig. 2. Upper Khabur Basin (UKB), Middle Khabur Basin (MKB), and Upper Euphrates Valley (UEV) archaeological sites discussed in the text (black squares). Sources of obsidian
artefacts found at Tell Mozan are marked by filled black circles, while obsidian sources not represented at Tell Mozan but discussed here are marked by open circles. The annual
migration route of an Alikan nomadic group during the 1960s, as mapped by Bes ̧ ikçi (1969) and redrawn in Cribb (1991), is shown, and the Bingöl province is highlighted.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 607“Canaanean” describes certain prismatic blades and blade segments with trapezoidal cross-sections. First described by Neuville
(1930, 1934) at EBA Levant sites, they are known across southeastern Anatolia and Northern Mesopotamia from the Late Chalcolithic through the EBA. Neuville’s type specimens were all chert
(obsidian is uncommon in the southern Levant; Renfrew et al.,
1966, 1968; Rosen et al., 2005), but the cross-section was the
defining trait. To this definition, Crowfoot (1948) added a narrow,
prepared platform and a negative bulb of percussion from earlier
removals; however, often only blade segments are recovered,
meaning these characteristics are commonly absent (Rosen, 1983;
Edens, 1999). Another oft-mentioned trait is that Canaanean
blades are “large” (e.g., Edens, 1999; Anderson et al., 2004).
It is frequently suggested that Canaanean blades were made by
pressure flaking with a lever, indirect percussion with a punch, or a
combination of both (Pelegrin and Otte, 1992; Anderson and Inizan,
1994; Bar and Winter, 2010; Pelegrin, 2012). Local variants in
platform-preparation and pressure-application practices have been
reported (Shimelmitz et al., 2000; Shimelmitz, 2009), revealing
regional technological differences in their production. That is,
Levantine “Canaanean” blades differ somewhat from Northern
Mesopotamian “Canaanean” blades. Chabot and Pelegrin (2012)
note that different workshops and production areas might have
developed distinct technological practices, perhaps leaving quite
subtle indicators. Evidently, a single “Canaanean” chaîne opératoire
was not used exclusively throughout the Near East.
It is also widely held that Canaanean blades exhibit an
extraordinary degree of standardisation (e.g., Anderson and Chabot,
2001; Chabot and Eid, 2007, 2009), having “standard width and
thickness” (Anderson et al., 2004:103). Standardisation is
straightforward to assess. At Hacınebi (Fig. 2), a recognised Canaanean workshop, Edens (1999) studied Canaanean blades and
non-Canaanean “simple” prismatic blades, defined largely by
width. Table 1 shows summary statistics for width, thickness, and
striking platform angle. Not only do the two blade types overlap for
every measure, but also their ranges and standard deviations
exhibit comparable variation. Even for width, their differences in
range and standard deviation is just 2 mm. Edens concluded that
the locals crafted Canaanean blades, whereas Southern Mesopotamian Uruk colonists made the “simple” ones. The disparity
between these types, he proposed, may have been a minor one in
knapping tools, body techniques, or other technological choice. For
example, he documented higher variability in the “simple” blades’
raw materials, which must be a cultural choice (given the same
constraints on raw-material access at the site) and may account for
the subtle standardisation differences.
Raw-material constraints and morphology should be considered
a potential factor in size as well as variables such as platform
Fig. 3. Examples of obsidian artefacts from areas A and B (Fig. 4) at Tell Mozan. (a) Prismatic blade, A12 q901 f382 k27. (b) Prismatic blade segment, A14 q433 f182 k5. (c) Prismatic
blade core, A7 q173 f49 k8. (d) Use-wear scratches on a blade segment, A7 q1721I f42 k6. Bottom row: reduction products with terms from Hirth (2006). (e) Macroflake, A5 q30. (f)
Macroblade, B4 q148 f418. (g) Percussion blade, A9 q658 f207 k11. (h) First-series blade, A18 q189 f44 k15. (iej) Second-series blades, B4 q131 and A17 q168 f100 k12. (kel) Early
prismatic blades, A17 q210-1 and A13 q26 f4 k5.
Table 1
Edens’ (1999) geometric data for Canaanean and “simple” prismatic blades from
Hacınebi (Fig. 3). The two blade populations overlap in all three measures, and their
degrees of standardisation (i.e., ranges and standard deviations) are largely
commensurate.
Canaanean “Simple”
Platform angle (deg.) MaxeMin 80e110 70e100
Range 30 30
Mean  s.d. 96  7 83  7
Width (mm) MaxeMin 14e45 6e35
Range 31 29
Mean  s.d. 29  6 19  8
Thickness (mm) MaxeMin 4e13 1e14
Range 9 13
Mean  s.d. 7  2 5  3
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621608preparation and striking angle. Rosen (1997) observed that
Levantine Canaanean blades are usually fine-grained brown chert,
whereas non-Canaanean blades tend to be “striped medium- to
fine-grained flint occurring in small- to medium-sized cobbles”
(33). Thus, he suggested that raw-material qualities and sizes
“would have affected blade production and proportions” (46) and,
consequently, limited Canaanean blade production to high-quality
cherts available as large nodules.
In addition to size, function has also been used to define Canaanean blades. Specifically, the blades are often described as
exhibiting sickle gloss (i.e., polished surfaces after processing cereals; e.g., Anderson and Chabot, 2001; Anderson et al., 2004;
Chabot and Eid, 2007, 2009; see discussion in Rosen, 1997:57).
This implies chert blades that were employed in other applications
(e.g., pottery production, Groman-Yaroslavski et al., 2013) or that
were unused are less likely to be labelled as “Canaanean.”
Obsidian blades are not given the “Canaanean” label. Obsidian
rarely exhibits sickle polish like that of cherts due to differences in
the rocks’ microstructures (but may exhibit other types of usewear; e.g., Fig. 2, Hurcombe, 1992). In addition, obsidian blades
tend to be smaller, perhaps due to the flaking properties or material
morphology. Brittleness or nodule/block size may have precluded
its use to make larger blades. In the American Southwest, for
example, obsidian is primarily available as small nodules, constraining artefact sizes (Shackley, 1986). Most striking are miniaturised obsidian Clovis points, just 4 cm in length. Although half
the size of chert points, obsidian points still receive the “Clovis”
label.
Recent studies in the Caucasus further obscure distinctions between Canaanean blades and obsidian prismatic blades. Badalyan
et al. (2007, 2010) conclude that obsidian blades from Late
Neolithic and Early Chalcolithic Armenian sites were made using
the same flaking techniques as Canaanean blades in Northern
Mesopotamia (i.e., pressure flaking with a lever). Thomalsky (2013)
asserts obsidian blades in Chalcolithic Nakhchivan and Neolithice
Chalcolithic Dagestan possess all the attributes of Canaanean blade
technology. Furthermore, similar to Cauvin (1996), she contends
that Canaanean knapping techniques were developed to make
obsidian blades and were subsequently transferred to chert.
Additionally, recent work by Pelegrin, Chabot, and colleagues
recognise a “genealogy” (Chabot and Pelegrin, 2012:196) among
Canaanean blades, Armenian obsidian blades, and other lithic
technologies in the region. For example, Chabot and Pelegrin (2006,
2012) conclude that Northern Mesopotamian Canaanean blades
and Neolithic Armenian obsidian blades are examples of pressure-
flaked prismatic blade production using a lever. Specifically, Chabot
et al. (2009) state that Late Neolithic obsidian blades at Aratashen, a
site in the Ararat Depression of Armenia, were crafted much like
“blade assemblages made by pressure lever in Northern Mesopotamia (Canaanean blades)” two millennia later (156).
Given local technological variations, precursors in the Caucasus,
and the inclusion of function and material to define an ostensibly
technological type, Canaanean blades seem (arguably) not a single,
discrete type of prismatic blade. Rather, it appears that blades given
the “Canaanean” label lie along fuzzy portions of a technological
continuum with both chert and obsidian prismatic blades. It is a
mistake to interpret this as a claim that the obsidian prismatic
blades at Tell Mozan and Canaanean blades represent the same
chaîne opératoire. As noted earlier, not even all Canaanean blades
share the same chaîne opératoire. Rather, these blades share a
common lithic heritage and, in turn, involve related “know-how.”
Therefore, at least on a theoretical level, it appears valid to link
the production and specialisation of “Canaanean” blades and
obsidian prismatic blades. Furthermore, as will be considered in
Section 4.4, chert and obsidian debitage and cores occur together in
a household knapping workspace at Tell Brak, providing archaeological justification for associating their production and
specialisation.
3. Predominant narrative and its arguments
The predominant narrative e here called the specialised blade
export (SBE) hypothesis e holds that Canaanean blades were
crafted in a few UEV workshops and exported to Northern Mesopotamia during the EBA (e.g., Anderson and Inizan, 1994; Chabot,
1999, 2002; Chabot et al., 2001; Anderson et al., 2004; Chabot
and Pelegrin, 2006, 2012; Chabot and Eid, 2003, 2007, 2009).
Here I summarise their arguments. Many of the proponents’ quotations refer to Tell ’Atij and Tell Gudeda in the Middle Khabur Basin
(MKB); however, they propose that their observations are widely
applicable in Northern Mesopotamia (Chabot et al., 2001:247) and
imply similar patterns exist at dozens of sites (e.g., Chabot and Eid,
2007: Fig. 1).
Anderson et al. (2004) argue that Canaanean blades were made
using levered pressure flaking and “this very specific technique might
point to. particular workshops” (95). Consequently, Chabot and Eid
(2007) claim these blades “were made in specialised workshops,
probably in the Anatolian region, and were then sent to northern
Mesopotamian agricultural settlements” (23). After finding few distal
blade segments at Mesopotamian sites, Chabot and Pelegrin (2006)
suggest that the blades were “fragmented into segments and then
exported” (103). Accordingly, Anderson et al. (2004) propose “a dynamic network involved in the production of agricultural products
throughout northern Mesopotamia” (123).
This hypothesis has two components. First, it is proposed that
lithic workshops tend to lie near raw-material sources and that, for
Canaanean blades, the workshops and sources occur in southeastern Anatolia. Anderson et al. (2004) list three UEV sites with
known Canaanean workshops e Hassek Höyük, Hacınebi, and Titris ̧
Höyük e as likely origins of the blades found in Northern
Mesopotamia.
Given the raw material on which pressure-knapped blades are
made using a lever (for example, a grayish-pink fine-grained
flint), it would seem that the workshops furnishing the Ninevite
V sites may be sought in the Bingöl area of Turkey, near Hassek
Höyük. their raw material strongly suggests that the workshop
sites will be found in southeastern Turkey. (95, 123)
It is worth noting that Hassek Höyük is not particularly “near” the
Bingöl province (Fig. 2). Chabot and Eid (2009) similarly argue that
the Canaanean blades at Tell Mozan
were also manufactured on a flint of generally good quality and
often grey-rosy colour. This type of flint has been identified only
in the Bingöl area in southeastern Turkey, where the only Canaanean workshops known to date in Northern Mesopotamia
were discovered: Hacınebi Tepe, Titris ̧ Höyük and Hassek
Höyük. We thus come to the conclusion that the flint blades of
Mozan come from the Anatolian workshops. (810; translated)
Two points must be made. First, these sites and Tell Mozan are
equidistant from the Bingöl region (Fig. 2). Second, their chert
classes are entirely visual. The researchers appear aware of this
limitation and, thus, link the narrative to obsidian sourcing.
Regarding Tell Gudeda and Tell ’Atij, Chabot (2002) states
physicochemical analysis of pieces of obsidian found that eight
of the ten tested pieces come from the Bingöl region. This
obsidian source is located 200 km east of Hassek Höyük. However, obsidian uncovered at Hassek also originated from the
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 609Bingöl A deposit. Without being able to determine that the ’Atij
and Gudeda Cananaean blades originated from the site of Hassek Höyük, it remains that the macroscopic analysis of siliceous
raw material and the obsidian demonstrate without a doubt a
link between the material found in this region and the Khabur
valley. (62, translated)
Chabot et al. (2001) similarly argue
research has already shown that the raw material from which
the large flint blades were made probably corresponds to that
found not far from the Cananaean knapping workshops in
southeastern Turkey. It is interesting to note that the physicochemical analyses reveal that eight of ten obsidian artefacts
analysed came from the Bingöl area where residents supplied at
least one of two Cananaean workshops known to date in this
area: Hassek Höyük (253e254, translated).
Thus, Bingöl obsidians (Fig. 2) at these MKB sites and Hassek Höyük
in the UEV purportedly establish a link between them. The overall
result is an interpretation that UEV workshops furnished chert (and
perhaps obsidian) blades to MKB and UKB settlements (e.g., Chabot
et al., 2001:253e254; Chabot, 2002:62; Anderson et al., 2004:123;
Chabot and Eid, 2007:11e12, 23, 2009:810, 819e820).
Second, it is argued the reduction sequence is incomplete at
Mesopotamian sites and that segments, not blades, arrived at these
settlements. Regarding Tell ’Atij and Tell Gudeda, Chabot et al.
(2001) argue
the virtual absence of cores or reduction products associated
with this activity seems to suggest that the production of these
artefacts did not take place at our sites. [Instead] specialised
workshops that had the expertise and the raw material then
exported their finished products to agricultural sites. (253e254;
translated)
Besides finding too few cortical flakes, they identified more medial
blade segments than distal blade ends at UKB and MKB sites.
Anderson et al. (2004:92) state “distal fragments (which are often
curved) are almost always missing from these sites,” suggesting
that truncation occurred elsewhere.
These two aspects of the SBE hypothesis are evaluated by
considering (1) the spatial organisation of prismatic blades and
their reduction debris at four Cananaean workshop sites and (2)
obsidian source data for key sites, including Tell Mozan and the
workshop sites (when available).
4. Spatial organisation of blade production
The SBE narrative presumes, in large part, that knowledge of
Canaanean blade workshops represents reality rather than sampling biases. Specifically, it assumes the social organisation of
workshops and spatial distributions of their products at urban
centres are compatible with the excavation strategy and sampling.
It is not necessarily a matter of excavation bias per se. Rather it is a
problem inherent to sampling large multi-period urban sites that
cannot be completely excavated. Unlike sites such as Tell Mozan
and Tell Brak, most key sites of the SBE hypothesis (i.e., Tell Gudeda
and Tell ’Atij in the MKB; Titris ̧ Höyük, Hassek Höyük, and Cafer
Höyük in the UEV) were rescue excavations ahead of dam
construction.
There is an expansive theoretical and archaeological literature
on the social and technological links between spatial organisation
and craft specialisation in the Near East (e.g., Stone, 1991; Stein and
Blackman, 1993; Stein, 1996; Wright, 2008; Rosen, 2010; Lehner
and Yener, in press) and worldwide (e.g., Arnold, 1991; Santley
and Kneebone, 1993; Stone, 1996; Janusek, 1999; Inomata and
Triadan, 2000; Bayman and Nakamura, 2001; Liu, 2004;
Patterson, 2005; Day and Doonan, 2007). Costin (2007) states the
core organising aspects of craft production systems are their spatial
and social organisation:
From these two elements e the locations of production activities in
geographic space and the location of production personnel in social space e key aspects of organisation are inferred: the relative
nucleation or dispersal of manufacturing activities and the
sociopolitical context in which production occurs. The identifi-
cation of production loci is important because it provides information on the physical arrangement of crafting activities and helps
in the reconstruction of the social contexts of production. (293)
Here I specifically consider three UEV Canaanean workshops recognised by SBE proponents (i.e., Hassek Höyük, Hacınebi, and Titris ̧
Höyük; e.g., Anderson et al., 2004:95, Chabot and Eid, 2009:810) and a
fourth at Tell Brak in the UKB. Based on the archaeological evidence, it
is clear that prismatic blade production in urban households yields
irregular debitage distributions, and the reduction sequence appears
complete, if at all, only in small areas of large cities, yielding sampling
and visibility issues.
4.1. Hacınebi
As mentioned in Section 2, Edens (1999) studied Canaanean and
“simple” prismatic blades at Late Chalcolithic Hacınebi. Canaanean
blades were spatially linked with the local Anatolian inhabitants,
whereas simple prismatic blades were associated with the Uruk
colonists. He claims both communities had specialist knappers
with their own production techniques and that Anatolian knappers
likely crafted Canaanean blades for both Anatolian and Uruk consumers. This implies local market exchange. Edens (1999) proposes
craftsmen at Hacınebi probably worked outside institutional
frameworks and produced for a relatively local market, not
interregional exchange. These points assume that blade production was a specialized craft, the skills for which relatively
few people at Hacınebi possessed. The very irregular spatial
distribution of blade workshop debris through the Hacınebi
sequence (Phases A-B2) supports this view. (33)
Four further observations from Edens (1999) are also relevant. First,
at this proposed Canaanean workshop site, chert blades and their
debitage comprise 15e20% of the assemblage, whereas blades and
their reduction products comprise roughly half of the obsidian artefacts at Tell Mozan. Second, obsidian is less than 1% of the known
Hacınebi assemblage, so production on the scale required to equip
even one urban centre the size of Tell Mozan seems improbable.
Third, Canaanean cores were reused as ad hoc flake cores at
Hacınebi. If this practice occurred at other sites, such reuse could
diminish evidence of Canaanean production occurring there. Lastly,
Edens (1999) observes that distal blade segments are “persistently
under-represented or under-identified (about one-third as frequent
as proximal segments)” (28). That is, there is only one distal
segment for every three proximal segments and for every six
medial segments. At Northern Mesopotamian sites, SBE proponents
maintain that missing distal segments are evidence of off-site
production and segmentation (e.g., Anderson et al., 2004:92), but
this phenomenon occurs at a recognised workshop site.
4.2. Titris ̧ Höyük
The EBA Canaanean workshop at Titris ̧ Höyük is located in a
house with different rooms for craft and domestic activities
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621610(Hartenberger, 2003). It lies in a suburb near the northeastern edge
of the settlement. Production debris was present in select rooms,
and hundreds of blade cores were discovered in several trash pits.
Hartenberger (2003) contends, based on archaeological and textual
evidence, the workshop functioned independently of elite or palace
control, offering an example of household-level specialisation.
About 1600 Canaanean cores were recovered from this workshop
area, but just one core was found in the other 3000 m 2 excavated. It
must be emphasised that the Canaanean reduction sequence is
complete only within a 20  20 m excavation unit at a 43-ha urban
centre (i.e., <1% of the site area).
4.3. Hassek Höyük
The spatial organisation of blade production at Hassek Höyük is
very similar to that of Titris ̧ Höyük (Behm-Blancke et al., 1984; Otte
and Behm-Blanke, 1992). In one room of House 3, 28 Canaanean
cores lay in a pile near a wall, while an additional dozen cores, as
well as blades and debris, were scattered throughout the room. This
stratum dates to the Late Uruk/EBA. Elsewhere at the site, however,
Canaanean blades and their production materials are rare, much
like Titris ̧ Höyük.
4.4. Tell Brak
SBE proponents have implied that Tell Brak was one of the
urban centres supplied with Canaanean blade segments by
Anatolian workshops (Chabot and Eid, 2007: Fig. 1; Chabot and
Pelegrin, 2012: Fig. 6.7). Excavations at Tell Brak (Fig. 3), however, show that Canaanean and obsidian blades were crafted
together. Canaanean blades are abundant in fourth- and thirdmillennia strata (Oates, 1993; Oates and Oates, 1993). About
50e60% of blades in those levels are obsidian, a higher proportion than at Hassek Höyük or Hacınebi (Wright, 1999). The cores
are principally chert, but obsidian cores are also present. Oates
and Oates (1993) argues that the Canaanean cores are like
those at Hassek Höyük and that production activities occurred at
Tell Brak.
Excavators found a structure with a courtyard, an adjacent room
with knapping debris, and a series of small rooms evocative of
workspaces or a souq (Oates and Oates, 1993; Oates and McMahon,
2008). The structure dates to the Late Uruk/EBA and has been
interpreted as a large house. Chert and obsidian debitage were
concentrated in a room adjacent to the courtyard, and several
Canaanean cores were also found in the workspace with a 2-kg
block of obsidian. This spatiotemporal association suggests that
knappers either used both raw materials to craft blades or specialised in one material but shared the same space. Debitage is rare
outside the structure, and Wright (1999) attributes this to specialised production in an urban context:
This fourth-millennium stone-tool assemblage from Tell Brak
does have some surprising features that merit emphasis. First, in
contrast to all other assemblages known to me, is the scarcity of
primary industrial debris. It is likely that this is an indication of
the degree of urban occupational specialization at the large
centre of Brak. (37)
Elsewhere only finished products are found, including a clay bladelet holder (with bladelets still in situ) in a house nearby (Wright,
2002; Oates, 2004). Therefore, there is evidence of local production
and consumption of chert and obsidian blades during the EBA. The
associated spatial organisation implies that, regardless of material,
prismatic blades may have had similar social organisation of
production.
5. Obsidians at Tell Mozan and other sites
A core argument of the SBE hypothesis is that the specialised
Anatolian workshop sites used cherts only found in the Bingöl region (e.g., Chabot et al., 2001:253e254; Anderson et al., 2004:95,
123; Chabot and Eid, 2009:810) and that these sites principally, if
not exclusively, used obsidians from the same region (e.g., Chabot
et al., 2001:253e254; Chabot, 2002:62, Chabot and Eid,
2009:820). Chemical analyses of Tell Mozan obsidian artefacts
revealed a great diversity of sources, very different from the Canaanean workshop sites of southeastern Anatolia. Furthermore,
reassessing prior obsidian sourcing studies at key sites reveals a
much more complex regional “sourcescape” than is put forward by
SBE proponents.
5.1. Tell Mozan
Tell Mozan was Urkesh, the religious and political capital of
Hurrian culture in the UKB. Hurrians lived in a transitional zone
along the border between highland Turkey and lowland Syria by
the mid-third millennium BCE. Textual evidence suggests that
Hurrians were a minority in UKB cities during the EBA and MBA, so
Urkesh is one of few conclusively Hurrian settlements. It was
among the largest cities in the UKB at the time. The high mound is
28 m tall and 20 ha (Fig. 4), and its surrounding outer city was
110 ha during its greatest extent. The site and its inhabitants are
worthy of more attention than, unfortunately, can be included here.
Readers are directed to Frahm (2010:165e214) as well as Buccellati
and Kelly-Buccellati (1997, 2002, 2005, 2009, inter alia) for further
discussion of Urkesh and the Hurrians.
From 1984 to 2010, Tell Mozan was excavated by Giorgio Buccellati and Marilyn Kelly-Buccellati with the International Institute
for Mesopotamian Area Studies (IIMAS). At the site, I examined
circa 820 obsidian and 1740 chert artefacts from the IIMAS excavation units (Fig. 4). Obsidian accounts for about a third (32%) of the
site’s lithic assemblage, and the other two-thirds are cherts. From
1998 to 2004, the site was also excavated by a University of
Tübingen team, led by Peter Pfälzner and Heike Dohmann-Pfälzner.
The team found about 300 obsidian and 500 chert artefacts in their
excavation units (Fig. 4.). Chabot and Eid’s (2009) interpretations
are based on lithics excavated by the Tübingen team.
A new programme of lithic analysis was planned for the 2011
season, but all foreign archaeological projects have been halted as a
result of the current security situation in Syria. Thus, it is not
possible at this time to give detailed lithic assemblage breakdowns
(i.e., precise numbers of distal, proximal, and medial segments).
There is evidence for obsidian prismatic blade production on-site
(Fig. 2); however, at present, that evidence cannot be considered
in a quantitative context. Additionally, elucidation of subtle variations in production (e.g., Pelegrin’s, 2012 different “modes” of
pressure blade production techniques; Astruc et al.’s, 2007 core
shaping practices) requires on-site assemblage studies. Functional
analysis of the obsidian tools is also of considerable interest;
however, due to taphonomic factors like the depositional sediment
chemistry (al Quntar et al., 2011), future use-wear studies also
necessitate fieldwork.
After this on-site survey of the lithic assemblage, a sample of 97
obsidian artefacts, all chip debris, was approved for export by the
Syrian Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums. Thus, 12%
of the obsidian assemblage was chemically sourced. The spatiotemporal span of these artefacts reflects the site’s recent excavations: 81 artefacts from area A, 3 from B, and 13 from J (Fig. 4),
spanning the late EBA III to LBA II. Artefacts were compared to over
900 geological specimens from 200 sampling loci in Anatolia and
the Caucasus (Fig. 1; Frahm, 2010:257e269). All artefacts and
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 611geological specimens were analysed using electron microprobe
analysis (EMPA), as detailed in Frahm (2010:302e364; 2012a).
Accuracy, repeatability, and reproducibility were evaluated using
international reference standards (e.g., VG-568 obsidian) and XRF
and NAA data from the University of Missouri Research Reactor
(MURR). These compatibility evaluations are detailed elsewhere
(Frahm, 2010:365e484, 2012a). All data are published online and
downloadable from stable archives (Frahm, 2010, 2012b; Frahm
and Feinberg, 2013b).
The chemical analyses reveal that Bingöl A and B obsidians account for less than one fourth (23%) of the sourced artefacts from
Tell Mozan. The rest (77%) originate from five sources: 60% from
Nemrut Dag, 6% from Tendürek Dag, 6% from Mus ̧ , 3% from Göllü
Dag, and 2% from Meydan Dag. Therefore, Tell Mozan has the most
diverse assemblage known in Mesopotamia to date (Frahm,
2010:590e629). There is a conflict between a hypothesis that the
residents of Tell Mozan relied on blade workshops using Bingöl
obsidians (e.g., Chabot et al., 2001:253e254; Chabot, 2002:62,
Chabot and Eid, 2009:820) and evidence that most obsidian originated from other sources, some hundreds of kilometres away.
Chabot and Eid (2009) argue that Tell Mozan provides evidence
for their model continuing from the EBA Ninevite V (3000e2500
BCE) into the MBA (2100e1600 BCE), spanning approximately a
millennium. In contrast, recent studies highlight centennial,
perhaps decadal, shifts in obsidian source-use at Tell Mozan,
including quarrying changes at the sources themselves (Frahm and
Feinberg, 2013a,b,c).
5.2. Reassessing “unknown” sources
Obsidians play a key role in the SBE narrative, so it is worth
reexamining the source attributions on which it is based, especially
when artefacts have unidentified sources. The reason to reconsider
past source assignments is not that the measurements are inaccurate, imprecise, or otherwise erroneous. Instead, I hold that these
data are generally compatible, at least for the purposes of sourcing
artefacts, with newer datasets. Rather, the issue is incomplete
geochemical data for Eastern Anatolian sources. Only recently have
certain lesser known sources been properly characterised (e.g.,
Frahm, 2010; Chataigner et al., 2013; Chataigner and Gratuze,
2013a,b). Rapp and Hill (1998) assert that, at the time, Anatolian
obsidian studies had misleading results “for two reasons: not all
potential source deposits have been sampled, and many deposits
were not sampled systematically e with full knowledge and
coverage of the geology” (137; also see Özdogan, 1994: 423). Thus,
studies crucial to the SBE hypothesis were conducted with insuf-
ficient data.
Integrating numerous datasets in an endeavour to create a
coherent obsidian reference database can result in diffuse “fingerprints” (Poidevin, 1998; Glascock, 1999). Here, however, I compare
just two datasets: artefact data from prior sourcing publications
and my geological dataset. The comparisons need only reveal
overall patterns for the artefacts and sources, and this may be done
because accuracy has been rigorously demonstrated for the EMPA
data. Specifically, agreement has been shown with data from MURR
(Frahm, 2010:365e484, 2012a; Darabi and Glascock, 2013) and
other labs (Le Bourdonnec et al., 2012; Chataigner et al., 2013). The
comparisons are also validated by replicating unambiguous identifications. If Hassek Höyük artefacts that Cauvin et al. (1991) assign
to Bingöl B also match the EMPA measurements for Bingöl B, that
reproducibility supports using the datasets together to identify
unknown artefacts.
5.3. Nemrut Dag or Bingöl A?
There are two principal obsidian varieties: calcalkaline and
peralkaline. Peralkaline obsidians occur in Southwest Asia at
Nemrut Dag volcano and in deposits of the Bingöl province (Fig. 3).
Peralkaline and calcalkaline obsidians both exist in Bingöl and are
known as Bingöl A and Bingöl B, respectively. Nemrut Dag and
Bingöl A obsidians are geochemically similar, and many researchers
report struggles to distinguish them (e.g., Gratuze et al., 1993, 1995;
Abbès et al., 2001, 2003; Rosen et al., 2005; Bellot-Gurlet and
Poupeau, 2006; Carter et al., 2008; Khalidi et al., 2009; Forster and
Grave, 2012). Previously, though, EMPA data have revealed six
Nemrut Dag obsidians and two Bingöl A obsidians (Frahm, 2012b).
Problems discerning Nemrut Dag and Bingöl A obsidians may
stem from sampling. For example, Carter et al. (2008) relied on
three Nemrut Dag specimens and one Bingöl A specimen, while
Bressy et al. (2005) analysed five from Nemrut Dag and two from
Fig. 4. Excavation units of sourced artefacts relative to the palace excavations (left) and areas A, B, and J on the tell (right). The IIMAS excavation units included in the study are
labelled: units in bold have sourced obsidian artefacts, while other units had artefacts included in the on-site lithic survey. Tübingen excavation squares are shaded grey (right).
Compiled and redrawn from various expedition maps.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621612Bingöl A. In contrast, the findings in Frahm (2012b) and here are
based on a collection of 100 Nemrut Dag and 40 Bingöl specimens.
When compiling data from so few specimens, researchers may
be comparing obsidians with distinct compositions and attributing
the variations to analytical error, not actual differences among
multiple flows. In reality, several elements (e.g., Zr, Ti, Fe, Al) vary
more among the Nemrut Dag obsidians than among all calcalkaline
Anatolian obsidians combined, so it seems unlikely analytical error
is the main issue. If it was, sourcing calcalkaline Anatolian obsidians
would not be so successful. While error is an issue, incomplete
sampling poses a greater problem (Glascock et al., 1998:20).
Inadequate sampling is also a problem for studies apparently
able to differentiate Nemrut Dag and Bingöl A obsidians. Notably,
Poidevin (1998) first used a CNK/A vs. NK/A plot (i.e., a peralkalinity
graph) to do so. Based on the available data, Poidevin (1998) reported Bingöl A obsidian fell between two groups of Nemrut Dag
obsidians: one with high peralkalinity and one with low. It was not
until Bressy et al. (2005) that a third Nemrut Dag group, one with
intermediate peralkalinity, was added to such plots. This casts into
doubt source attributions for Tell Gudeda and Tell ’Atij artefacts in
Chabot et al. (2001).
5.4. Implications for lithic analysis
Bingöl A and B obsidians are among the oldest in Anatolia (3.2e
5.1 and 4.3e6.1 Ma, respectively; Chataigner et al., 1998; Bigazzi
et al., 1998), whereas Nemrut Dag obsidians are among the youngest (310 ka on its slopes and <30 ka in the caldera; Notsu et al.,
1995; Yılmaz et al., 1998). The Bingöl obsidians were millions of
years old even before the Nemrut Dag volcano started forming circa
1.2 Ma (Pearce et al., 1990). As a result of these sources’ disparate
ages (and other factors such as eruption type and soil chemistry),
their raw-material morphologies can differ markedly, yielding
consequences for lithic analysis.
Obsidian often forms during the eruption of rhyolitic lava domes
(Fig. 5). Where exposed, it occurs as angular blocks without cortex
due to fractures along porous layers and naturally occurring cracks.
Thus, Nemrut Dag obsidians occur as blocks with largely
Fig. 5. Angular obsidian blocks (c and e) with no cortex and parallel surfaces due to fractures along flow bands. These blocks are available atop (b) and around the perimeter (d) of a
young obsidian-bearing lava flow (a). These examples come from the Newberry volcano caldera, very similar to the Nemrut Dag caldera (Frahm, 2012b,c). Fresh angular blocks will
have initial reduction stages and products different from chert river cobbles. Top illustration based on figures in Fink and Manley (1987), Hughes and Smith (1993), and Stevenson
et al. (1996); redrawn and modified by the author. Photographs by the author.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 613unweathered surfaces (Özdemir et al., 2006; Ulusoy et al., 2008).
After millions of years, obsidian blocks become rounded nodules
through weathering and transport by water and mudflows
(Shackley, 2005). Bingöl A obsidian in the Çavus ̧ lar locality, for
example, occurs as rounded nodules, 10e25 cm in diameter
(Poidevin, 1998). Over time these nodules developed cortex, and
streams and lahars scattered them across distances of 20 km
(Cauvin et al., 1986).
Cauvin (1996) considers how such differences in morphology
affect reduction processes. A nodule of Bingöl A obsidian and one of
chert will yield similar patterns of cortical flakes. As the nodule is
encased by cortex, the initial flake removed has an entirely cortical
dorsal surface and striking platform, and cortex decreases in subsequent removals. A source like Nemrut Dag, however, yields blocks
without cortex. Thus, abundance of cortical flakes is not always a
valid measure of the form in which obsidian was transported. It is
important to determine the volcanic sources before applying such a
metric.
All Tell Mozan artefacts from Nemrut Dag match obsidians in the
caldera (Frahm, 2012b). Thus, the artefacts were crafted of obsidians two orders of magnitude younger than Bingöl obsidians. Other
obsidians at the site have intermediate ages between 60 ka (Meydan Dag) and 1.9 Ma (Mus ̧ ; Bigazzi et al., 1994, 1997; Yılmaz et al.,
1998). While cortical flakes are uncommon at Tell Mozan, most
artefacts are made of obsidian from young sources, for which chertlike cortex should not be expected.
5.5. Cafer Höyük
Twelve artefacts from Cafer Höyük established the idea that
obsidian at UEV sites originated in the Bingöl province (Cauvin
et al., 1986; republished in Cauvin et al., 1991). According to
Cauvin et al. (1986), seven artefacts are Bingöl B obsidian, and the
other five are Bingöl A obsidian. Fig. 6 shows the artefacts with my
geological data. The two datasets exhibit sufficient agreement to
corroborate the artefacts’ original attributions to Bingöl A and B.
Thus, based on the available data, Cafer Höyük inhabitants drew
primarily on the Bingöl obsidian sources. Cauvin (1998) suggests
that they collected cobbles transported by the Murat River, and she
reports some artefacts exhibit cortex and evidence of water
transport (263).
5.6. Hassek Höyük
Of the three UEV settlements with known Canaanean workshops, only Hassek Höyük has published obsidian sourcing results.
No artefacts have been sourced from Titris ̧ Höyük. A “small sample”
of Hacınebi artefacts were analysed by M. Blackman at the Smithsonian, but his results are unpublished. There is only a mention in
Edens (1999): “most pieces derive from Bingöl and [Lake] Van
sources, but. a few pieces come from the Göllüdag source in
central Anatolia and the Gutansar source in Armenia” (25).
Cauvin et al. (1991) sourced 10 Hassek Höyük artefacts and
attributed seven artefacts to Bingöl B, one to Bingöl A, one to an
unknown peralkaline source, and one to an unknown calcalkaline
source. Fig. 7 plots the artefacts and my geological data. The artefacts assigned to Bingöl B match my data, establishing dataset
compatibility. One artefact has a best match to Bingöl A, while the
unidentified peralkaline artefact matches Nemrut Dag. The unidentified calcalkaline artefact matches Pasinler. All artefacts but
one date to the Late Uruk (3300e3100 BCE). The only Bingöl A
artefact dates to the EBA.
Pernicka (1992) sourced 17 artefacts from Hassek Höyük. Ten
artefacts were assigned to Bingöl B, and Fig. 8 corroborates this
result (despite few elements in common between datasets). Pernicka assigns the other seven artefacts to Nemrut Dag, but the
comparison suggests that one is actually Bingöl A obsidian. All 17
artefacts date to the Late Chalcolithic (i.e., fourth millennium BCE).
5.7. Tell ’Atij and Tell Gudeda
Ten sourced artefacts from Tell Gudeda and Tell ’Atij have key
roles in the SBE narrative (Section 3). These sites, both small (<1 ha)
villages, are 700 m apart along the Khabur River. Collectively, their
assemblages are only 0.4% obsidian: ten obsidian artefacts were
found at Tell Gudeda and 19 at Tell ’Atij. Chabot et al. (2001) propose that their conclusions are widely applicable because “these
two sites are quite representative of this whole region of Northern
Mesopotamia” (247; translated).
To attribute peralkaline artefacts to Bingöl A or Nemrut Dag,
Chabot et al. (2001) used Poidevin’s (1998) peralkalinity approach
(Section 5.3). Four artefacts from each site fell into the intermediate
range, so they attributed all eight artefacts to Bingöl A. The
Fig. 6. Data for twelve Cafer Höyük artefacts (black symbols) from Cauvin et al. (1986) plotted with EMPA data for peralkaline (left) and calcalkaline (right) Eastern Anatolian
obsidians. The datasets exhibit sufficient agreement to corroborate the artefacts’ original attributions to Bingöl A and B. Thus, based on the available data, the Cafer Höyük inhabitants drew largely on the Bingöl obsidian sources.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621614intermediate Nemrut Dag cluster, added by Bressy et al. (2005), was
absent from their data analysis, casting this source attribution into
doubt. Additionally, two Tell ’Atij artefacts had unknown sources.
Fig. 9 shows these artefacts with my geological dataset. Chabot
et al. (2001) correctly identified the peralkaline artefacts as Bingöl A obsidian, showing compatibility of the datasets. The unidentified Tell ’Atij artefacts match Pasinler, about 100 km northeast
of the Bingöl sources (Fig. 2). Of the two Pasinler artefacts, one is a
small fragment from an undated context. The other, however, is a
prismatic blade segment, and it was discovered in an EBA stratum
with Ninevite V sherds (Fortin, 1998).
5.8. Tell Brak
Section 4.4 considers the spatial organisation of chert and
obsidian blade production at Tell Brak, so it is worth considering
the obsidian sources represented among its artefacts. Over half
(53%) of the sourced Tell Brak artefacts have no context
(Francaviglia and Palmieri, 1998; Forster and Grave, 2012), and
none are securely dated to the EBA or MBA. Khalidi et al. (2009),
though, sourced eight Late Chalcolithic obsidian fragments, and
they assigned one fragment to Meydan Dag, three to Bingöl B, and
four to Bingöl A. Fig. 10 corroborates their source attributions to
Meydan Dag and Bingöl B, establishing data compatibility. The
published peralkaline artefact matches Nemrut Dag, not Bingöl A.
Thus, just over one third (38%) of the obsidian originated in the
Bingöl area. Although these results predate the focus of the SBE
hypothesis (i.e., the EBA and, to a lesser extent, MBA), as discussed
in Section 2, recent studies in the Caucasus suggest that Canaaneanlike technology already existed at this time. A forthcoming chapter
on Tell Brak may offer new insights more relevant to the period in
question (Khalidi, in press).
5.9. Summary of obsidian data
Fig. 11 summarises the obsidian sources represented at Tell
Mozan, Cafer Höyük, Hassek Höyük, Tell Gudeda, Tell ’Atij, and Tell
Brak. This graph also highlights a considerable change in obsidian
source-use at Tell Mozan between Phases 2 and 3 (see discussion in
Frahm and Feinberg, 2013b). Of these sites (and all Mesopotamian
Fig. 7. Data for ten Hassek Höyük artefacts (black symbols) from Cauvin et al. (1991) plotted with EMPA data for peralkaline (left) and calcalkaline (right) Eastern Anatolian obsidians. Cauvin et al. (1991) attributed seven artefacts to Bingöl B, one to Bingöl A, one to an unknown peralkaline source, and one to an unknown calcalkaline source. The artefacts
assigned to Bingöl A and B match these data, establishing data compatibility. The unidentified peralkaline artefact matches Nemrut Dag, and the unidentified calcalkaline artefact
matches Pasinler.
Fig. 8. Data for seventeen Hassek Höyük artefacts (black symbols) from Pernicka (1992) plotted with EMPA data for peralkaline (left) and calcalkaline (right) Eastern Anatolian
obsidians. Despite few elements in common between these datasets, this comparison corroborates the attribution of ten artefacts to Bingöl B, establishing dataset compatibility.
Pernicka (1992) attributes seven peralkaline artefacts to Nemrut Dag, but this comparison strongly suggests that one is actually Bingöl A obsidian.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 615sites with obsidian sourcing data), Tell Mozan has the most diverse
obsidian assemblage, which exhibits the greatest overall similarity
to nearby Tell Brak. Notably, Tell Gudeda and Tell ’Atij are not
representative of other sites, including the UEV sites to which they
are often compared.
Fig. 12 simplifies the results in Fig. 11, reconceptualising them as
a dichotomy between Bingöl and non-Bingöl obsidians. Tell Mozan
has the lowest overall fraction of Bingöl obsidian, followed closely
by Tell Brak. In the UEV, based on the available data, Cafer Höyük
inhabitants relied heavily, perhaps even exclusively, on Bingöl obsidians. The only UEV site with a Canaanean workshop and obsidian
data, Hassek Höyük, has 20e35% non-Bingöl obsidian based on two
independent sourcing studies.
5.10. Rejecting maximal efficiency (again)
It is worth noting that these reassessed data undermine assumptions regarding “efficient” origins of lithic materials. The SBE
hypothesis associates chert and obsidian sources in the Bingöl region because, at least in part, it simply seems efficient that, if a
settlement’s inhabitants used chert from that area, they would also
use obsidian from there (and vice versa). This is similar to a common approach to deal with analytical inabilities to distinguish
Nemrut Dag and Bingöl A obsidians (Section 5.3).
Unable to differentiate among peralkaline obsidians, Gratuze
et al. (1993) suggested the following: “if, at one archaeological
site, we find the artefacts have the two compositions of the Bingöl
area, we may suppose that the artefacts come from Bingöl” (16).
That is, if calcalkaline Bingöl B obsidian is found at a site, one may
presume that the peralkaline obsidian originated from Bingöl A, not
Nemrut Dag. If Bingöl B obsidian does not occur at the site, the
peralkaline obsidian may have originated from either Nemrut Dag
or Bingöl A. This supposition was followed in subsequent studies.
For example, Khalidi et al. (2009) assigns peralkaline artefacts at
Tell Brak (Section 5.8) to Bingöl A, not Nemrut Dag, due to the
occurrence of Bingöl B obsidian there. Their hypothesis essentially
presumes humans choose to act with maximum utility for the cost.
Specifically, it holds that, if people had access to Bingöl B obsidian,
they would not also have Nemrut Dag obsidian when it is maximally efficient to obtain nearby Bingöl A obsidian.
Fig. 9. Data for ten Tell Gudeda and Tell ’Atij artefacts (black symbols) from Chabot et al. (2001) plotted with EMPA data for peralkaline (left) and calcalkaline (right) Eastern
Anatolian obsidians. This comparison corroborates the attribution of eight artefacts to Bingöl A, establishing compatibility of these datasets. Two unidentified calcalkaline artefacts
match Pasinler.
Fig. 10. Data for five of eight Tell Brak artefacts (black symbols) sourced by Khalidi et al. (2009) plotted with EMPA data for peralkaline (left) and calcalkaline (right) Eastern
Anatolian obsidians. This comparison corroborates the original attribution of three artefacts to Bingöl B and one to Meydan Dag, establishing data compatibility. The one published
peralkaline artefact matches Nemrut Dag rather than Bingöl A.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621616Previously, the Tell Mozan obsidian results established that this
assumption of maximal efficiency is incorrect (Frahm, 2012b). The
site has three features with Bingöl B and Nemrut Dag obsidians
together, one feature with Bingöl A and Nemrut Dag obsidians, and
one feature with only Bingöl A and B obsidians. The reassessment of
earlier studies’ data reveals that, of these five sites, only one e Cafer
Höyük e is consistent with the “Bingöl A and B together” archetype
of Gratuze and his colleagues. In contrast, Hassek Höyük has Bingöl
A and B obsidians with Nemrut Dag (and Pasinler) obsidians. Tell
Gudeda has only Bingöl A, while Tell ’Atij has Bingöl A obsidian with
calcalkaline obsidian from Pasinler, not Bingöl B. Tell Brak, however,
has Bingöl B obsidian with peralkaline Nemrut Dag, not Bingöl A,
obsidian. Therefore, this assumption by Gratuze et al. (1993) is also
demonstrably false at sites other than Tell Mozan. In short, one
cannot assume that, if Bingöl A obsidian was used, Bingöl B obsidian
was used too and vice versa.
The implications of these obsidian data apply as well to lithic
assemblages of chert and obsidian. If the obsidians at a site such as
Hassek Höyük originated from the Bingöl deposits, it is invalid to
assume that its inhabitants relied on cherts from the same region.
Additionally, if cherts from the Bingöl region were, in fact, used at a
site, its obsidians cannot be assumed to have originated there too.
Forces other than maximal efficiency moved people and materials
throughout the Bronze-Age Near East.
Tell Mozan - Frahm (n=97)
Tell Mozan - Phase 2 (n=20)
Tell Mozan - Phase 3 (n=17)
Tell Gudeda - Chabot et al. (n=4)
Tell Brak - Khalidi et al. (n=8)
0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Nemrut Da
Mu
Meydan Da
Pasinler
UEV
MKB
UKB
Fig. 11. Summary of the obsidian sources represented at Tell Mozan, Cafer Höyük, Hassek Höyük, Tell Gudeda, Tell ’Atij, and Tell Brak. Also shown is the drastic change in obsidians
at Tell Mozan between Phases 2 and 3 (see discussion in Frahm and Feinberg, 2013b). Tell Mozan has the most diverse overall obsidian assemblage and appears to exhibit a basic
similarity with Tell Brak. The results for Tell Gudeda and Tell ’Atij are not representative of those for the other sites, including the two UEV settlements.
Tell Mozan - Frahm (n=97)
Tell Mozan - Phase 2 (n=20)
Tell Mozan - Phase 3 (n=17)
Tell Gudeda - Chabot et al. (n=4)
Tell Brak - Khalidi et al. (n=8)
0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
UEV
MKB
UKB
Fig. 12. Simplification of Fig. 11 to show a dichotomy between Bingöl and non-Bingöl obsidian sources. Tell Mozan has the lowest overall proportion of Bingöl obsidian, followed
closely by Tell Brak. In the UEV, Cafer Höyük relied heavily on Bingöl obsidians, but it has no known Canaanean blade workshop. The only UEV site here with a Canaanean workshop,
Hassek Höyük, has 20e35% non-Bingöl obsidian.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 6176. Interpretation and discussion
Rather than obsidian blade segments arriving at Tell Mozan
from specialised UEV workshop sites, a likely alternative is that
these diverse obsidians arrived as cores. Clark (1987) argues that
cores are the most efficient form of cutting-edge storage and, thus,
desirable to limit weight. This would be consistent with the distribution of obsidians by transhumant groups (Fig. 3; routes of an
Alikan nomadic group during the 1960s from Bes ̧ ikçi, 1969) or via
interactions with the Early Transcaucasian (i.e., Kura-Araxes) culture of Eastern Anatolia and the Caucasus, also attested by ceramic
evidence at Tell Mozan (red-and-black burnished ware in the
palace complex; Kelly-Buccellati, 2005; Buccellati and KellyBuccellati, 2007).
Khalidi et al. (2009) propose that obsidian diversity is a directness metric: one predominant source indicates direct access, while
varied obsidians imply indirect access and exchange linked with
other goods. Three sources are represented by eight artefacts from
Tell Brak, so they conclude that inhabitants were not involved in
direct procurement from the sources. Given the full reduction
sequence occurs at the site, they propose that obsidian arrived as
cores or preforms and that, rather than large-scale production,
there was a “cottage industry” or household production. This is
consistent with the household production at UEV sites. Khalidi et al.
(2009) suggest that obsidian was likely worked by “individuals
with the capacity to knap on a need-to-use basis, using whatever
materials were available” (885). A household industry based on
diverse transported raw materials seems a likely counter-narrative
for Tell Mozan as well.
Likely used for a variety of cutting and scraping tasks, from food
processing to pottery production, Cauvin (1998) suggests that “the
‘know-how’ involved in the work of obsidian [tools], much more
vital and fundamental, should not be limited to a few tradesmen”
(268; translated). This raises the potential for a true “cottage industry,” a term that refers to farmers and their families working
from their homes, manufacturing a product, when there was little
agricultural work to do. It has been argued that, based on Uruk
assemblages at Southern Mesopotamian sites, blade production
was widely distributed on a household scale and involved little
market exchange (Pope and Pollock, 1995; Pollock et al., 1996).
Evidence of exchange between the two Hacınebi communities (i.e.,
that Anatolian knappers likely crafted Canaanean blades for both
Anatolian and Uruk consumers, according to Edens, 1999), and
souq-like rooms at Tell Brak support household production but
focused on the local market (Oates and Oates, 1993; Oates and
McMahon, 2008).
The workshop at Tell Brak was found on the high mound, but the
Titris ̧ Höyük workshop is located in a suburb on the city’s outskirts.
Hartenberger et al. (2000) note that their attention was only drawn
to this area by Canaanean cores brought to the surface by ploughing. Hence, archaeological visibility and sampling, especially of
satellite settlements and outer cities, is a significant issue when
considering regional and intra-site spatial patterning. Sediment
cores show that, due to rapid sedimentation around 2800e1000
BCE, EBA strata in the outer city of Tell Mozan lie beneath 180 cm of
accumulation (Pustovoytov et al., 2011). Thus, a blade workshop
located in the Urkesh suburbs would lie below plough depth. This is
not the case throughout the UKB, and Wilkinson (2003) discusses
the visibility of Near Eastern sites at length.
Another visibility issue involves the oft-missing distal blade
segments. Debitage disposal practices and reuse of distal segments
should be considered as explanations alternative to off-site production. Even at an accepted Canaanean workshop site, Hacınebi,
there is one distal segment found for every three proximal segments and for every six medial segments, and Canaanean cores
were reused as ad hoc flake cores (Edens, 1999). Wright (1999)
proposes the dearth of production debitage at Tell Brak reflects
household production in an urban setting, suggesting disposal
practices may differ in these contexts. At Titris Höyük, Canaanean
cores were primarily found in pits dug for their disposal
(Hartenberger, 2003). My study of the Tell Mozan lithic assemblage
revealed geometric microliths (e.g., trapezes, lunates), notches, and
transverse points made from blade segments, possibly distal ones,
contributing to their apparent deficit.
7. Concluding remarks
This paper raises issues that must be considered in reconstructing the organisation of obsidian (and, to a lesser extent, chert)
blades in Bronze-Age Northern Mesopotamia. The site literature
reveals that urban household-scale blade production yields irregular debitage distributions, and the blade reduction sequence is
complete in only small areas of urban centres. An incomplete
corpus of reduction products may relate more to archaeological
sampling and visibility than suggesting off-site production activities. Even at known blade workshops, there are absences in the
debitage: at Hacınebi, there is one distal segment found for every
three proximal segments and every six medial segments (Edens,
1999). Chemical analyses of Tell Mozan obsidian artefacts
revealed seven sources, very different from the Canaanean workshop sites of the UEV. A majority (77%) of the sourced Tell Mozan
artefacts originated from sources other than Bingöl A and B.
Furthermore, reassessing prior obsidian sourcing studies at key
sites reveals a much more complex regional “sourcescape” than the
SBE narrative suggests. The reassessed obsidian data also demonstrate that, when Nemrut Dag and Bingöl A obsidians are discerned,
the results often undermine assumptions regarding maximal effi-
ciency in lithic acquisition. Due to the considerable differences in
age and, in turn, raw-material morphology of these obsidians,
discerning them is also crucial before interpreting cortical metrics
of reduction.
When combined with the lithic evidence from Tell Mozan
(Fig. 2), the obsidian sourcing results and archaeological clues
regarding the socio-spatial organisation of blade production do not
support importation of finished obsidian blade segments from
workshops in the UEV or Bingöl province. Local production of
obsidian (and perhaps also chert) blades is a viable counternarrative, resulting in a very distinct picture of lithic craft specialisation in EBA-MBA Northern Mesopotamia. Rather than imagining
couriers transporting shipments of finished blade segments from
UEV workshops to UKB urban centres, obsidian may instead have
arrived as blocks, perhaps with some initial shaping, or cores
brought by peoples from diverse areas and/or with diverse itineraries. Various obsidians, most often from sources other than the
Bingöl deposits (Nemrut Dag, Mus ̧ , Tendürek Dag, Meydan Dag, and
Göllü Dag), potentially reached the hands of the cities’ specialists
involved in household-scale production principally for the local
market.
One future direction for this work is clear. When foreign
archaeological projects resume, a priority will be sourcing the full
Tell Mozan obsidian assemblage using portable X-ray fluorescence
(pXRF), which was tested during the study at hand (Frahm, 2013;
Frahm and Feinberg, 2013a,b). Using pXRF on-site would enable
greater integration of obsidian sourcing and technological analysis
based on a sample determined less by export restrictions and more
by the intellectual framework in which the research is conceived.
The entire Tell Mozan obsidian assemblage could be sourced in a
week or two. The same could be done for other sites, leading to a
particular regional context (i.e., EBA-MBA UKB) with sites that have
been intensively sourced and a focus on the organisation of lithic
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621618production, consumption, and discard. Coupled with technological
and functional analyses, Copeland’s (1995) questions can be
meaningfully addressed.
Acknowledgements
Giorgio Buccellati and Marilyn Kelly-Buccellati are co-directors
of the Urkesh expedition under the auspices of the International
Institute for Mesopotamian Area Studies (IIMAS). Export of the Tell
Mozan artifacts was approved by the Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums, Syrian Arab Republic. Michael Glascock of
the MURR Archaeometry Laboratory is thanked for NAA and XRF
data used to evaluate the EMPA data and establish inter-technique
compatibility of the measurements. This research was supported by
the Departments of Earth Sciences and Anthropology at the University of Minnesota, Department of Archaeology at the University
of Sheffield, and Marie Curie Network FP7-PEOPLE-2010-ITN: New
Archaeological Research Network for Integrating Approaches to
Ancient Material Studies (NARNIA). Two anonymous reviewers
offered comments and criticisms that improved the resulting paper.
References
Abbès, F., Bellot-Gurlet, L., Bressy, C., Cauvin, M.-C., Gratuze, B., Poupeau, G., 2001.
Nouvelles recherches sur l’obsidienne de Cheikh Hassan (Vallée de l’Euphrate,
Syrie) au Néolithique: PPNA et PPNB Ancien. Syria 78, 5e17.
Abbès, F., Bellot-Gurlet, L., Cauvin, M.-C., Delerue, S., Dubernet, S., Poupeau, G.,
Stordeur, D., 2003. Provenance of the Jerf el Ahmar (Middle Euphrates Valley,
Syria) obsidians. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 323, 162e166.
Akkermans, P.M.M.G., Schwartz, G.M., 2003. The Archaeology of Syria: from Complex Hunter-Gatherers to Early Urban Societies (c.16,000e300 BC). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
al Quntar, S., Khalidi, L., Ur, J., 2011. Proto-urbanism in the late 5th millennium BC:
survey and excavations at Khirbat al-Fakhar (Hamoukar), Northeast Syria.
Paléorient 37 (2), 151e175.
Anderson, P., Chabot, J., 2001. Functional analysis of Glossed blades from Northern
Mesopotamia in the Early Bronze Age (3000e2500 BC): the case of Tell ’Atij. In:
Journees d’etude du Groupe de recherches en archeometrie du CELAT, 1997e
1999, pp. 257e276.
Anderson, P.C., Inizan, M.-L., 1994. Utilisation du Tribulum au Début du IIIe Millénaire: Des Lames «Cananéennes» Lustrées à Kutan (Ninive V) dans la Région
de Mossoul, Iraq. Paléorient 20, 85e103.
Anderson, P., Chabot, J., Van Gijn, A., 2004. The functional Riddle of ‘Glossy’ Canaanean Blades: the Apogee of the Mesopotamian Threshing Sledge. J. Mediterr.
Archaeol. 17 (1), 87e132.
Arnold, P.J., 1991. Domestic Ceramic Production and Spatial Organization: a Mexican
Case Study in Ethnoarchaeology. Cambridge University Press.
Astruc, L., Gratuze, B., Pelegrin, J., Akkermans, P., 2007. From production to use: a
parcel of obsidian bladelets at Sabi Abyad II. La diversité des systèmes techniques des communautés du Néolithique pré-céramique: vers la caractérisation
des comportements sociaux. In: 5 e colloque international sur les industries
lithiques du Néolithique pré-céramique sous la direction de Laurence Astruc,
Didier Binder et François Briois. Éditions APDCA, Antibes, pp. 327e341.
Badalyan, R., Lombard, P., Avetisyan, P., Chataigner, C., Chabot, J., Vila, E.,
Hovsepyan, R., Willcox, G., Pessin, H., 2007. New data on the late prehistory of
the Southern Caucasus. The excavations at Aratashen (Armenia): preliminary
report. In: Lyonnet, B. (Ed.), Les Cultures du Caucase (VIe-IIIe millénaires avant
notre ère). Leurs relations avec le Proche-Orient. CNRS éditions, pp. 37e61.
Badalyan, R., Harutyunyan, A., Chataigner, C., Le Mort, F., Chabot, J., Brochier, J.-E.,
Balasescu, A., Radu, V., Hovsepyan, R., 2010. The settlement of AknashenKhatunarkh, a Neolithic site in the Ararat Plain (Armenia): excavation results
2004e2009. Tüba-Ar 13, 187e220.
Bar, S., Winter, H., 2010. Canaanean flint blades in Chalcolithic context and the
possible onset of the transition to the Early Bronze Age: a case study from
Fazael 2. Tel Aviv 37, 33e47.
Bayman, J.M., Nakamura, J.J.M., 2001. Craft specialization and Adze production on
Hawai’i Island. J. Field Archaeol. 28, 239e252.
Behm-Blancke, M.R., Hoh, M.R., Karg, N., Masch, L., Parsche, F., Weiner, K.L., von
Wickede, A., Wiedermeyer, G., 1984. Hassek Höyük: Vorl. Bericht über die
Grabungen in den Jahren 1981e83. Istanb. Mitt. 34, 31e150.
Bellot-Gurlet, L., Poupeau, G., 2006. Towards a non-destructive multi-step analytical
methodology for the provenance determination of archaeological obsidians. In:
Young Chemists’ Workshop on Chemistry for the Conservation of Cultural
Heritage: Present and Future Perspectives, pp. 1e4.
Bes ̧ ikçi, I., 1969. Gocebe Alikan As ̧ iret. Dogan Yayinevi, Ankara.
Bigazzi, G., Yegingil, Z., Ercan, T., Oddone, M., Özdogan, M., 1994. Provenance studies
of prehistoric artifacts in Eastern Anatolian: Interdisciplinary research results.
Mineral. Petrogr. Acta 37, 17e36.
Bigazzi, G., Yegingil, Z., Ercan, T., Oddone, M., Özdogan, M., 1997. Age determination
of obsidian bearing volcanics in Eastern Anatolia using the Fission Track dating
Method. Geol. Bull. Turk. 40 (2), 57e73.
Bigazzi, G., Poupeau, G., Yegingil, Z., Bellot-Gurlet, L., 1998. Provenance studies of
obsidian artefacts in Anatolia using the Fission-Track dating Method: an
Overview. In: Cauvin, M.-C., Gourgaud, A., Gratuze, B., Arnaud, N., Poupeau, G.,
Poidevin, J.L., Chataigner, C. (Eds.), L’obsidienne au Proche et Moyen-Orient: Du
Volcan à l’Outil. BAR, Oxford, pp. 70e89.
Bressy, C., Poupeau, G., Yener, K., 2005. Cultural interactions during the Ubaid and
Halaf periods: Tell Kurdu (Amuq Valley, Turkey) obsidian sourcing. J. Archaeol.
Sci. 32, 1560e1565.
Buccellati, G., Kelly-Buccellati, M., 1997. Urkesh: the first Hurrian capital. Biblic.
Archaeol. 60 (2), 77e96.
Buccellati, G., Kelly-Buccellati, M., 2002. Mozan/Urkesh: a new capital in the
Northern Djezireh. In: Documents d’Archeologie Syrienne I: the Syrian Jezira:
Cultural Heritage and Interrelations. Ministere de la Culture, Direction Generale
des Antiquites et des Musees, Republique Arabe Syrienne, pp. 127e133.
Buccellati, G., Kelly-Buccellati, M., 2005. Urkesh as a Hurrian Religious Center. In:
Studi Micenei ed Egeo-Anatolici, vol. 47, pp. 27e59.
Buccellati, G., Kelly-Buccellati, M., 2007. Urkesh and the Question of the Hurrian
Homeland. Bull. Georgian Natl. Acad. Sci. 175 (2), 141e151.
Buccellati, G., Kelly-Buccellati, M., 2009. The Great Temple Terrace at Urkesh and
the Lions of Tish-atal. In: Wilhelm, G. (Ed.), Studies on the Civilization and
Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians, vol. 18. CDL Press, Bethesda, Maryland,
pp. 33e69.
Cann, J.R., Renfrew, C., 1964. The characterization of obsidian and its application to
the Mediterranean Region. Proc. Prehist. Soc. 30, 111e133.
Carter, T., Dubernet, S., King, R., Le Bourdonnec, F.-X., Milic, M., Poupeau, G.,
Shackley, M.S., 2008. Eastern Anatolian obsidians at Çatalhöyük and the
Reconfiguration of regional interaction in the Early Ceramic Neolithic. Antiquity
82, 900e909.
Cauvin, M.-C., 1996. L’obsidienne dans le Proche-Orient prehistorique: etat des
recherches en 1996. Anatolica 22, 1e31.
Cauvin, M.-C., 1998. L’obsidienne: Données Récentes Provenant de Sites-Habitats
Néolithiques. In: Cauvin, M.-C., Gourgaud, A., Gratuze, B., Arnaud, N.,
Poupeau, G., Poidevin, J.L., Chataigner, C. (Eds.), L’obsidienne au Proche et
Moyen-Orient: Du Volcan à l’Outil. BAR, Oxford, pp. 259e271.
Cauvin, M.C., Chataigner, C., 1998. Distribution de l’obsidienne dans les sites
archéologiques du Proche et du Moyen Orient (par phase chronologique). In:
Cauvin, M.-C., Gourgaud, A., Gratuze, B., Arnaud, N., Poupeau, G., Poidevin, J.L.,
Chataigner, C. (Eds.), L’obsidienne au Proche et Moyen-Orient: Du Volcan à
l’Outil. BAR, Oxford, pp. 325e350.
Cauvin, M.-C., Balkan, N., Besnus, Y., S ̧ aroglu, F., 1986. Origine de l’Obsidienne de
Cafer Höyük (Turquie): Premiers Résultats. Paléorient 12, 89e97.
Cauvin, M.-C., Besnus, Y., Tripier, J., Montigny, R., 1991. Nouvelles analyses d’obsidiennes du Proche-Orient: modèle de géochimie des magmas utilisé pour la
recherche archéologique. Paléorient 17, 5e20.
Chabot, J., 1999. Tell ’Atij et Tell Gudeda: les artefacts en pierre taillée. Université
Laval, thèse de doctorat. Available online at the Library and Archives Canada
website: http://www.nlc-bnc.ca/obj/s4/f2/dsk2/ftp02/NQ39342.pdf.
Chabot, J., 2002. Tell ’Atij Tell Gudeda: Industrie lithique. In: Cahiers d’archéologie
du CELAT, no 13. Série d’archéométrie no 3. Université Laval, Québec.
Chabot, J., Eid, P., 2003. Le phénomène des lames cananéennes: état de la question
en Mésopotamie du nord et au Levant Sud. In: Le traitement des récoltes: un
regard sur la diversité du Néolithique au présent. CNRS Éditions, Antibes,
pp. 401e415.
Chabot, J., Eid, P., 2007. Stone Tools from a Bronze Age Village (Tell Nusstell, Syria) in
Their Wider Context. In: Berytus Archaeological Studies, vol. 50, pp. 7e36.
Chabot, J., Eid, P., 2009. Tell Mozan: le matériel lithique. In: Bianchi, A., Wissing, A.
(Eds.), Die Kleinfunde. Studien zur Urbanisierung Nordmesopotamiens. Ausgrabungen 1998e2001 in der zentralen Oberstadt von Tall Mozan/Urkes. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, pp. 803e820.
Chabot, J., Pelegrin, J., 2006. Two examples of lithic industries employing pressure
flaking with a lever: recent research from Northern Mesopotamia (Syria, Irak)
and Southern Caucasus (Armenia). In: UISPP/IUPPS, XV Congress/XV Congrès.
Université de Lisbonne. Abstract available online at: http://www.uispp.ipt.pt/
UISPPprogfin/Livro4.pdf.
Chabot, J., Pelegrin, J., 2012. Two examples of pressure blade production with a
lever: recent research from the Southern Caucasus (Armenia) and Northern
Mesopotamia (Syria, Iraq) (Chapter 6). In: Desrosiers, P. (Ed.), The Emergence of
Pressure Blade Making: from Origin to Modern Experimentation. Springer,
pp. 181e198.
Chabot, J., Poidevin, J.L., Chataigner, C., Fortin, M., 2001. Caracterisation et provenance des artefacts en obsidienne de Tell ’Atij et de Tell Gudeda (III millenaire,
Syrie). In: Cahiers d’Acheologie du CELAT, vol. 10, pp. 241e256.
Chabot, J., Badalyan, R., Chataigner, C., 2009. A Neolithic obsidian industry in the
Southern Caucasus Region: origins, technology and Traceology. In: Moreau, J.-F.,
Auger, R., Chabot, J., Herzog, A. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Symposium on
Archaeometry, Cahiers d’archéologie du CELAT, 25; Série Archéométrie, 7.
CELAT, pp. 151e160.
Chataigner, C., Gratuze, B., 2013a. New data on the exploitation of obsidian in the
Southern Caucasus (Armenia, Georgia) and Eastern Turkey, Part 1: source
characterization. Archaeometry. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/arcm.12006.
Chataigner, C., Gratuze, B., 2013b. New data on the exploitation of obsidian in the
Southern Caucasus (Armenia, Georgia) and Eastern Turkey, Part 2: Obsidian
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 619Procurement from the Upper Palaeolithic to the Late Bronze Age. Archaeometry.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/arcm.12007.
Chataigner, C., Poidevin, J.L., Arnaud, N.O., 1998. Turkish occurrences of obsidian and
use by prehistoric peoples in the Near East from 14,000 to 6000 BP. J. Volcanol.
Geotherm. Res. 85, 517e537.
Chataigner, C., Is ̧ ıklı, M., Gratuze, B., Çil, V., 2013. Obsidian sources in the regions of
Erzurum and Kars (North-East Turkey): new data. Archaeometry. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/arcm.12002.
Clark, J., 1987. Politics, prismatic blades, and Mesoamerican Civilization. In:
Johnson, J.K., Morrow, C.A. (Eds.), The Organization of Core Technology. Westview Press, pp. 259e284.
Copeland, L., 1995. The Phantom Obsidian Traders of the Jazirah. In: Neo-Lithics: a
Newsletter of Southwest Asian Lithics Research, vol. 1, pp. 5e6.
Costin, C.L., 2007. Craft production systems. In: Feinman, Gary M., Douglas Price, T.
(Eds.), Archaeology at the Millennium: a Sourcebook. Springer, pp. 273e328.
Cribb, R., 1991. Nomads in Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Crowfoot, J., 1948. Some flint implements from ’Affula. J. Palest. Orient. Soc. 21, 72e
79.
Darabi, H., Glascock, M.D., 2013. The source of obsidian artefacts found at East Chia
Sabz, Western Iran. J. Archaeol. Sci.. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.04.022.
Day, P.M., Doonan, R.C.P., 2007. Metallurgy in the Early Bronze Age Aegean. In:
Sheffield Studies in Aegean Archaeology, vol. 7. Oxbow Books, Oxford.
Edens, C., 1999. The chipped stone industry at Hacınebi: technological Styles and
social Identity. Paléorient 25, 23e33.
Fink, J.H., Manley, C.R., 1987. Origin of Pumiceous and Glassy Textures in Rhyolite
flows and domes. In: Fink, J.H. (Ed.), The Emplacement of Silicic Domes and Lava
Flows, Geological Society of America Special Paper 212, pp. 77e88.
Forster, N., Grave, P., 2012. Non-destructive PXRF analysis of museum-curated
obsidian from the Near East. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 728e736.
Fortin, M., 1998. New Horizons in Ancient Syria: the view from ’Atij. Near East.
Archaeol. 61, 15e24.
Frahm, E., 2010. The Bronze-age Obsidian Industry at Tell Mozan (Ancient Urkesh),
Syria (Ph.D. dissertation). Department of Anthropology, University of Minnesota. Available online at University of Minnesota’s Digital Conservancy: http://
purl.umn.edu/99753.
Frahm, E., 2012a. Non-destructive sourcing of Bronze-Age near Eastern obsidian
artefacts: redeveloping and reassessing electron microprobe analysis for
obsidian sourcing. Archaeometry 54, 623e642.
Frahm, E., 2012b. Distinguishing Nemrut Dag and Bingöl A obsidians: geochemical
and landscape differences and the archaeological implications. J. Archaeol. Sci.
39, 1435e1444.
Frahm, E., 2012c. What Constitutes an obsidian “source”?: landscape and
geochemical considerations and their archaeological implications. Int. Assoc.
Obsidian Stud. Bull. 46, 16e28.
Frahm, E., 2013. Validity of “Off-the-Shelf” Handheld portable XRF for sourcing near
Eastern obsidian chip debris. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40, 1080e1092.
Frahm, E., Feinberg, J.M., 2013a. Empires and Resources: central Anatolian obsidian
at Urkesh (Tell Mozan, Syria) during the Akkadian Period. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40,
1122e1135.
Frahm, E., Feinberg, J.M., 2013b. Environment and collapse: Eastern Anatolian obsidians at Urkesh (Tell Mozan, Syria) and the Third-Millennium Mesopotamian
Urban Crisis. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40, 1866e1878.
Frahm, E., Feinberg, J.M., 2013c. From flow to Quarry: magnetic properties of
obsidian and changing the scales of archaeological sourcing. J. Archaeol. Sci..
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.04.029.
Francaviglia, V., Palmieri, A., 1998. Analisi di ossidiane dell’area del Habur (Giazira
Settentrionale). In: Pecorella, P.E. (Ed.), Tell Barri/Kahat 2: Relazione Sulle
Campagne 1980e1993 a Tell Barri/Kahat, nel Bacino del Habur (Siria). Università degli studi di Firenze, pp. 335e344.
Glascock, M.D., 1999. An inter-laboratory comparison of element compositions for
two obsidian sources. Int. Assoc. Obsidian Stud. Bull. 23, 13e25.
Glascock, M.D., Braswell, G., Cobean, R.H., 1998. A systematic approach to obsidian
source characterization. In: Shackley, M.S. (Ed.), Archaeological Obsidian
Studies: Method and Theory. Society for Archaeological Sciences, pp. 15e65.
Gratuze, B., Barrandon, J., Al Isa, K., Cauvin, M.-C., 1993. Non-destructive analysis of
obsidian artefacts using nuclear techniques: investigation of provenance of
Near Eastern artefacts. Archaeometry 35, 11e21.
Gratuze, B., Barrandon, J., Al Isa, K., Cauvin, M.-C., 1995. Obsidian trade in the Near
East in Neolithic and Bronze-Age Times. PACT 45, 499e506.
Groman-Yaroslavski, I., Iserlis, M., Eisenberg, M., 2013. Potters’ Canaanean flint
blades during the Early Bronze Age. Mediterr. Archaeol. Archaeom. 13, 171e184.
Hartenberger, B., 2003. A Study of Craft Specialization and the Organization of
Chipped Stone Production at Early Bronze Age Titris ̧ Höyük, Southeastern
Turkey (Doctoral dissertation). Boston University.
Hartenberger, B., Rosen, S., Matney, T., 2000. The Early Bronze Age blade workshop
at Titris Höyük: lithic specialization in an urban context. Near East. Archaeol.
63, 51e58.
Hirth, K.G., 2006. Obsidian Craft Production in Ancient Central Mexico: Archaeological Research at Xochicalco. The University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Hughes, R.E., Smith, R.L., 1993. Archaeology, geology, and geochemistry of obsidian
provenance studies. In: Stein, J.K., Linse, A.R. (Eds.), Effects of Scale on
Archaeological and Geological Perspectives, Geological Society of America,
Special Paper, vol. 283, pp. 79e91.
Hurcombe, L.M., 1992. Use Wear Analysis and Obsidian: Theory, Experiments, and
Results. J.R. Collis Publications.
Inomata, T., Triadan, D., 2000. Craft production by Classic Maya elites in domestic
settings: data from rapidly abandoned structures at Aguateca, Guatemala.
Mayab 13, 57e66.
Janusek, J.W., 1999. Craft and local power: embedded specialization in Tiwanaku
cities. Lat. Am. Antiq. 10, 107e131.
Johnson, J.K., 1996. Lithic analysis and questions of cultural complexity (Chapter 6).
In: Odell, G.H. (Ed.), Stone Tools: Theoretical Insights into Human Prehistory.
Springer, pp. 159e179.
Kelly-Buccellati, M., 2005. Urkesh and the North: recent discoveries. In: Owen, D.I.,
Wilhelm, G. (Eds.), Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the
Hurrians. CDL Press, pp. 29e40.
Khalidi, L. Fifth millennium BC obsidian production in Area TW, Tell Brak. In:
McMahon, A. (Ed.), Preludes to Urbanism in Mesopotamia: Festschrift in Honour of Joan Oates’ 80th Birthday and 57 Years of Archaeological Work in the
Near East. BAR, Archaeopress, Oxford (in press).
Khalidi, L., Gratuze, B., Boucetta, S., 2009. Provenance of obsidian excavated from
Late Chalcolithic levels at the sites of Tell Hamoukar and Tell Brak, Syria.
Archaeometry 51, 879e893.
Le Bourdonnec, F.-X., Nomade, S., Poupeau, G., Guillou, H., Tushabramishvili, N.,
Moncel, M.-H., Pleurdeau, D., Agapishvili, T., Voinchet, P., Mgeladze, A.,
Lordkipanidze, D., 2012. Multiple origins of Bondi Cave and Ortvale Klde (NW
Georgia) obsidians and human mobility in Transcaucasia during the Middle and
Upper Palaeolithic. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 1317e1330.
Lehner, J.W., Yener, K.A. Organization and specialization of early mining and metal
technologies in Anatolia. In: Roberts, B.W., Thornton, C.P. (Eds.), Reader in Early
Metallurgy: Old and New World Perspectives. Springer Verlag, New York (in press).
Liu, L., 2004. The Chinese Neolithic. Cambridge University Press.
Neuville, R., 1930. Notes de Préhistoire Palestinienne. J. Palest. Orient. Soc. 10, 193e221.
Neuville, R., 1934. Objets en silex. In: Mallon, A., Koeppel, R., Neuville, R. (Eds.),
Teleilat Ghassul I. Pontifical Biblical Institute, Rome, pp. 55e65.
Notsu, K., Fujitani, T., Ui, T., Matsuda, J., Ercan, T., 1995. Geo-chemical features of
collision related volcanic rocks in central and Eastern Anatolia, Turkey.
J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 64, 171e192.
Oates, J., 1993. Trade and power in the fifth and fourth millennia BC: new evidence
from Northern Mesopotamia. World Archaeol 24 (3), 403e422.
Oates, J., 2004. Archaeology in Mesopotamia: Digging Deeper at Tell Brak. Albert
Reckitt Archaeological Lecture. British Academy, 2004. Tell Brak Project Website. Online at the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research (Last updated
2/2006, accessed 4/2013).
Oates, J., McMahon, A., 2008. Area TW: Archaeological Details. Tell Brak Project
website. Online at the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research (Last
updated 10/2008, accessed 4/2013).
Oates, D., Oates, J., 1993. Excavations at Tell Brak 1992e93. In: Iraq 55, pp. 155e199.
Otte, M., Behm-Blanke, M.R., 1992. Das lithische Inventar: Rekonstrukzion technischer Verfahrensweisen. In: Behm-Blanke, M.R. (Ed.), Hasek Höyük: Naturwissenschaftliche Untersuchungen und lithische Industrie, pp. 225e247.
Özdemir, Y., Karaoglu, Ö., Tolluoglu, A., Güleç, N., 2006. Volcanostratigraphy and
Petrogenesis of the Nemrut Stratovolcano (East Anatolian High Plateau): the
most recent post-collisional volcanism in Turkey. Chemical Geology 226 (3e4),
189e211.
Özdogan, M., 1994. Obsidian in Anatolia: an archaeological perspective on the status
of the research. In: Archaeometry 94: the Proceedings of the 29th International
Symposium on Archaeometry; Ankara, 9e14 May 1994, pp. 423e431.
Patterson, T.C., 2005. Craft specialization, the reorganization of production relations, and state formation. J. Soc. Archaeol. 5, 307e337.
Pearce, J.A., Bender, J.F., De Long, S.E., Kidd, W.S.F., Low, P.J., Güner, Y., Saroglu, F.,
Yılmaz, Y., Moorbath, S., Mitchell, J.G., 1990. Genesis of collision volcanism in
Eastern Anatolia, Turkey. J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 44, 189e229.
Pelegrin, J., 2012. New experimental observations for the characterization of pressure blade production techniques. In: Desrosiers, P.M. (Ed.), The Emergence of
Pressure Blade Making: from Origin to Modern Experimentation. Springer
Science and Business Media, pp. 465e500.
Pelegrin, J., Otte, M., 1992. Einige Bemerkungen zur Präparations- und Ausbeuttechnik der Kernsteine aus Raum 29. In: Behm-Blancke, Manfred R. (Ed.),
Hassek-Höyük: Naturwissenschaftliche Untersuchungen und lithische Industrie, Istanbuler Forschungen, vol. 38. Verlag, Tübingen, pp. 219e224.
Pernicka, E., 1992. Herkunftsbestimmung späturukzeitlicher obsidianfunde vom
Hassek Höyük. In: Istanbuler Forschungen, vol. 38, pp. 124e131.
Poidevin, J.L., 1998. Les gisements d’obsidienne de Turquie et de Transcaucasie:
géologie, géochimie et chronométrie. In: Cauvin, M.-C., Gourgaud, A., Gratuze, B.,
Arnaud, N., Poupeau, G., Poidevin, J.L., Chataigner, C. (Eds.), L’obsidienne au
Proche et Moyen-Orient: Du Volcan à l’Outil. BAR, Oxford, pp. 105e167.
Pollock, S., Pope, M., Coursey, C., 1996. Household production at the Uruk Mound,
Abu Salabikh, Iraq. Am. J. Archaeol. 100 (4), 683e698.
Pope, M., Pollock, S., 1995. Trade, tools, and tasks: a study of Uruk chipped stone
industries. Res. Econ. Anthropol. 16, 227e265.
Pustovoytov, K., Deckers, K., Goldberg, P., 2011. Genesis, age and archaeological
significance of a pedosediment in the depression around Tell Mozan, Syria.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 38, 913e924.
Rapp, G.R., Hill, C.L., 1998. Geoarchaeology: the Earth-Science Approach to
Archaeological Interpretation. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Renfrew, C., Cann, J., Dixon, J., 1965. Obsidian in the Aegean. Annu. Br. Sch. Athens
60, 225e247.
Renfrew, C., Dixon, J., 1976. Obsidian in western Asia: a review. Probl. Econ. Soc.
Archaeol. 42, 137e150.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621620Renfrew, C., Dixon, J., Cann, J., 1966. Obsidian and early cultural contact in the Near
East. Proc. Prehist. Soc. 2, 30e72.
Renfrew, C., Dixon, J., Cann, J., 1968. Further analysis of near Eastern obsidians. Proc.
Prehist. Soc. 34, 319e331.
Rosen, S., 1983. The Canaanean blade and the Early Bronze Age. Isr. Explor. J. 33, 15e
29.
Rosen, S., 1997. Lithics after the Stone Age: a Handbook of Stone Tools from the
Levant. AltaMira Press.
Rosen, S., 2010. Activity areas, workshops, and variations on the theme from a Near
Eastern lithic perspective. J. Isr. Prehist. Soc. 40, 167e182.
Rosen, S., Tykot, R., Gottesman, M., 2005. Long distance trinket trade: Early Bronze
Age obsidian from the Negev. J. Archaeol. Sci. 32, 775e784.
Santley, R.S., Kneebone, R.R., 1993. Craft specialization, refuse disposal, and the
creation of spatial archaeological records in prehispanic Mesoamerica. In:
Santley, R.S., Hirth, K.G. (Eds.), Prehistoric Domestic Units in Western Mesoamerica: Studies of the Household, Compound and Residence. CRC Press, Ann
Arbor, pp. 37e63.
Shackley, M.S., 1986. Obsidian Geochemistry and lithic technology: inferences for
Archaic Hunter-Gatherer procurement ranges. In: Bayham, F.E., Morris, D.H.,
Shackley, M.S. (Eds.), Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers of South Central Arizona.
The Picacho Reservoir Archaic Project, Anthropological Field Studies, vol. 13.
Arizona State University, Tempe, pp. 171e190.
Shackley, M.S., 2005. Obsidian: Geology and Archaeology in the North American
Southwest. University of Arizona.
Shackley, M.S., 2008. Archaeological Petrology and the Archaeometry of lithic
materials. Archaeometry 50, 194e215.
Shimelmitz, R., 2009. Variability in specialized Canaanean blade production of the
Early Bronze Age Levant. In: Rosen, S., Roux, V. (Eds.), Techniques and People.
Anthropological Perspectives on Technology in the Archaeology of the Protohistoric and Early Historic Periods in the Southern Levant. De Boccard, Paris,
pp. 135e156.
Shimelmitz, R., Barkai, R., Gopher, A., 2000. A Canaanean blade workshop at Mt.
Haruvim, Israel. Tel Aviv 27, 3e22.
Stein, G., 1996. Producers, Patrons, and Prestige: craft specialists and emergent
elites in Mesopotamia from 5500e3100 BC. In: Wailes, Bernard (Ed.), Craft
Specialization and Social Evolution, University Museum Monograph 93. University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia, pp. 25e38.
Stein, G., Blackman, M.J., 1993. The Organizational context of specialized craft
production in Early Mesopotamian States. Res. Econ. Anthropol. 14, 29e59.
Stevenson, R., Dingwell, D., Webb, S., Sharp, T., 1996. Viscosity of microlite-bearing
rhyolitic obsidians: an experimental study. Bull. Volcanol. 58, 298e309.
Stone, E.C., 1991. The spatial organization of Mesopotamian cities. Aula Orient. 9,
235e242.
Stone, G.D., 1996. Settlement Ecology: the Social and Spatial Organization of Kofyar
Agriculture. University of Arizona Press.
Thomalsky, J., 2013. Large blade technologies in the Transaucasus and Northern
Mesopotamia from 6e4th Millennium BC. In: At the Northern Frontier of Near
Eastern Archaeology Conference, Venice, 9e11 January 2013.
Ulusoy, I., Labazuy, P., Aydar, E., Ersoy, O., Çubukçu, E., 2008. Structure of the Nemrut
Caldera (Eastern Anatolia, Turkey) and associated hydrothermal fluid circulation. J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 174, 269e283.
Ur, J., 2002. Surface collection and offsite studies at Tell Hamoukar, 1999. Iraq 64,
15e43.
Weiss, H., Courty, M.-A., 1993. The genesis and collapse of the Akkadian empire: the
accidental refraction of historical law. In: Liverani, M. (Ed.), Akkad: the First
World Empire. Sargon, Padua, pp. 131e155.
Wilkinson, T.J., 1997. Environmental fluctuations, agricultural production and
collapse: a view from Bronze Age Upper Mesopotamia. In: Dalfes, H., Kukla, G.,
Weiss, H. (Eds.), Third Millennium BC Climate Change and Old World Collapse.
Springer, Berlin, pp. 67e106.
Wilkinson, T.J., 2000. Regional approaches to Mesopotamian archaeology: the
contribution of archaeological surveys. J. Archaeol. Res. 8, 219e267.
Wilkinson, T.J., 2003. Archaeological Landscapes of the Near East. University of
Arizona Press.
Wilkinson, T.J., Christiansen, J., Ur, J., Widell, M., Altaweel, M., 2007. Urbanization
within a dynamic environment: modeling Bronze Age Communities in Upper
Mesopotamia. Am. Anthropol. 109, 52e68.
Wright, H.T., 1999. Middle and Late Uruk flake-stone assemblages from the 1997
and 1998 seasons. In: Emberling, G., Pittman, H., Weber, J., Wright, H.T. (Eds.),
Excavations at Tell Brak 1998: Preliminary Report, Iraq 61, pp. 1e41.
Wright, H.T., 2002. In: Al-Gailani, et al. (Eds.), Arrows and Arrowheads in the Uruk
World’, pp. 373e378.
Wright, K.I., 2008. Craft production and the organization of ground stone technologies. In: Rowan, Y., Ebeling, J. (Eds.), New Approaches to Old Stones: Recent
Studies of Ground Stone Artefacts. Equinox Archaeology Books, London,
pp. 130e143.
Yılmaz, Y., Güner, Y., S ̧ aroglu, F., 1998. Geology of the Quaternary volcanic centres of
the East Anatolia. J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 137, 177e199.
E. Frahm / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 605e621 621